.\" $Id: LM.3,v 1.5 2007/12/19 22:01:46 stolcke Exp $
.TH LM 3 "$Date: 2007/12/19 22:01:46 $" SRILM
.SH NAME
LM \- Generic language model
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "#include <LM.h>"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B LM
class specifies a minimal language model interface and
provides some generic utilities.
.PP
.B LM
inherits from
.BR Debug ,
and the debugging level of an LM object determines if and how much
verbose information various is printed by various functions.
.SH "CLASS MEMBERS"
.TP
.B "LM(Vocab &\fIvocab\fP)"
Initializeing an LM object requries specifying the vocabulary 
over which the LM is defined.
The \fIvocab\fP object can be shared among different LM instances.
The LM object can modify \fIvocab\fP as a side-effect, e.g., as a result
of reading an LM from a file.
.TP
.B "LogP wordProb(VocabIndex \fIword\fP, const VocabIndex *\fIcontext\fP)"
.TP
.B "LogP wordProb(VocabString \fIword\fP, const VocabString *\fIcontext\fP)"
Returns the conditional log probability of \fIword\fP given a history.
The history is given in reversed order (most recent word first) in 
\fIcontext\fP, and terminated by \fBVocab_None\fP.
Word or history can be specified either by strings or indices.
All functional LM subclasses have to implement at least the first version.
.TP
.B "LogP wordProbRecompute(VocabIndex \fIword\fP, const VocabIndex *\fIcontext\fP)"
Returns the same conditional log probability as \fBwordProb()\fP,
but on the promise that \fIcontext\fP is identical to the last call
to \fBwordProb()\fP.
This often allows for efficient implementation to speed up repeated 
lookups in the same context.
.TP
.B "LogP sentenceProb(const VocabIndex *\fIsentence\fP, TextStats &\fIstats\fP)"
.TP
.B "LogP sentenceProb(const VocabString *\fIsentence\fP, TextStats &\fIstats\fP)"
Returns the total log probability of a string of word (a sentence).
The data in the \fIstats\fP object is incremented to reflect the
statistics of the sentence.
.TP
.B "unsigned pplFile(File &\fIfile\fP, TextStats &\fIstats\fP, const char *\fIescapeString\fP = 0)"
Reads sentences from \fIfile\fP, computing their probabilities and
aggregate perplexity, and updating the \fIstats\fP.
The debugging state of the LM object determines how much information is
printed to stderr.
debuglevel 0: total statistics only;
debuglevel 1: per-sentence statistics;
debuglevel 2: word probabilities;
debuglevel 3 and greater: LM specific information.
.br
Lines in \fIfile\fP that start with \fIescapeString\fP are copied to
the output.
This allows extra information in the input file to be passed through
unchanged.
.TP
.B "unsigned rescoreFile(File &\fIfile\fP, double \fIlmScale\fP, double \fIwtScale\fP, LM &\fIoldLM\fP, double \fIoldLmScale\fP, double \fIoldWtScale\fP, const char *\fIescapeString\fP = 0)"
Reads N-best hypotheses and scores from \fIfile\fP, replaces the
LM scores with new ones computed from the current model, and prints
the new scores (including hypotheses) to stdout.
\fIlmScale\fP and \fIwtScore\fP are the LM and word transition weights,
respectively.
\fIoldLM\fP is the LM whose scores are included in the aggregate scores
read from the input (provided so that they can be subtracted out),
and \fIoldLmScale\fP and \fIoldWtScale\fP are the old LM and word 
transition weights, respectively.
.br
Lines in \fIfile\fP that start with \fIescapeString\fP are copied to
the output.
.TP
.B "void setState(const char *\fIstate\fP)"
This is a generic interface to change the internal ``state'' of a LM.
The default implementation of this function does nothing, but certain
LM subclass implementation may interpret the \fIstate\fP string to
assume different internal configurations.
.TP
.B "Prob wordProbSum(const VocabIndex *\fIcontext\fP)"
Returns the sum of all word probabilities in \fIcontext\fP.
Useful for checking the well-definedness of a model.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex generateWord(const VocabIndex *\fIcontext\fP)"
Returns a word index from the vocabulary, randomly generated 
according to the conditional probabilities in \fIcontext\fP.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex *generateSentence(unsigned \fImaxWords\fP = maxWordsPerLine, VocabIndex *\fIsentence\fP = 0)"
.TP
.B "VocabString *generateSentence(unsigned \fImaxWords\fP = maxWordsPerLine, VocabString *\fIsentence\fP = 0)"
Generates a random sentence of length up to \fImaxWords\fP.
The result is placed in \fIsentence\fP if specified, or in a
static buffer otherwise.
.TP
.B "void *contextID(const VocabIndex *\fIcontext\fP)"
Returns an implementation-dependent value that identifies a the
word context used to compute a conditional probability.
(The context actually used may be shorted that what is specified
in \fIcontext\fP).
.TP
.B "Boolean isNonWord(VocabIndex \fIword\fP)"
Return \fBtrue\fP if \fIword\fP is a regular word in the LM, i.e.,
one that the LM computes probabilities for (as opposed to
non-event tag such as sentence-start).
.TP
.B "Boolean read(File &\fIfile\fP, Boolean \fIlimitVocab\fP = false)"
Read a LM from \fIfile\fP.
Return \fBtrue\fP is the file contents was formated correctly and 
an internal LM representation could be successfully constructed from it.
The optional 2nd argument controls whether words not already in the vocabulary
are to be added automatically.
.TP
.B "void write(File &\fIfile\fP)"
Writes the LM to \fIfile\fP in a format that can be read back by
\fBread()\fP.
.TP
.B "Vocab &vocab"
The vocabulary object associated with LM (set at initialization).
.TP
.B "VocabIndex noiseIndex"
The index of the noise tag, i.e., a word that is skipped when
computing probabilities.
.TP
.B "const char *stateTag"
A string introducing ``state'' information that should be passed to the LM.
Input lines starting with this tag are handed to \fBsetState()\fB
by \fBpplFile()\fP and \fBrescoreFile()\fP.
.TP
.B "Boolean reverseWords"
If set to \fBtrue\fP, the LM reverses word order before computing 
sentence probabilities.
This means \fBwordProb()\fP is expected to compute conditional
probabilities based on \fIright\fP contexts.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Vocab(3).
.SH BUGS
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>.
.br
Copyright 1995, 1996 SRI International
