.\" $Id: Vocab.3,v 1.2 2007/12/19 22:01:46 stolcke Exp $
.TH Vocab 3 "$Date: 2007/12/19 22:01:46 $" SRILM
.SH NAME
Vocab \- Vocabulary indexing for SRILM
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "#include <Vocab.h>"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B Vocab
class represents sets of string tokens as typically used for vocabularies,
word class names, etc.  Additionally, Vocab provides a mapping from
such string tokens (type \fBVocabString\fP) to integers (type \fBVocabIndex\fP).
VocabIndex values are typically used to index words in language models to
conserve space and speed up comparisons etc.  Thus,
\fBVocab\fP essentially
implements a symbol table into which strings can be ``interned.''
.SH TYPES
.TP
.B VocabIndex
A non-negative integer for representing a string internally.
.TP
.B VocabString
A character array representing a vocabulary item (e.g., a word).
.SH CONSTANTS
.TP
.B maxWordLength
Maximum number of characters in a VocabString.
.TP
.B Vocab_None
A special VocabIndex used to denote no vocabulary item and to 
terminate VocabIndex arrays.
.TP
.B Vocab_Unknown
.TP
.B Vocab_SentStart
.TP
.B Vocab_SentEnd
.TP
.B Vocab_Pause
Default VocabString values for some common, predefined vocabulary items:
unknown word, sentence begin, sentence end, and pause, respectively.
.SH "CLASS MEMBERS"
.TP
.B "Vocab(VocabIndex \fIstart\fP = 0, VocabIndex \fIend\fP = 0x7fffffff)"
When initializing a Vocab object,
\fIstart\fP and \fIend\fP optionally set the minimum and maximum VocabIndex
values assigned by the vocabulary.
Indices are allocated in increasing order starting at \fIstart\fP.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex addWord(VocabString \fIname\fP)"
Looks up the index of a word string \fIname\fP, adding the word if not already
part of the vocabulary.
.TP
.B "VocabString getWord(VocabIndex \fIindex\fP)"
Returns the VocabString for \fIindex\fP, or 0 if the index isn't defined.
.TP
.B "getIndex(VocabString \fIname\fP)"
Returns the VocabIndex for word \fIname\fP, or
.B Vocab_None
if the word isn't defined.
(Unlike \fBaddWord()\fP,
this will not extend the vocabulary if the word is undefined.)
.TP
.B "void remove(VocabString \fIname\fP)"
.TP
.B "void remove(VocabIndex \fIindex\fP)"
Deletes a vocabulary item, either by name or by index.
.TP
.B "unsigned int numWords()"
Returns the number of current vocabulary entries.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex highIndex()"
Returns the highest VocabIndex value assigned so far.
The next word added will receive an index that is one greater.
When allocating various meaningful vocabulary subsets into 
contiguous ranges, this function can be used to determine the
corresponding boundaries in VocabIndex space, and then use these
values to test subset membership etc.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex unkIndex"
The index of the unknown word (by default assigned to \fBVocab_Unknown\fP).
.TP
.B "VocabIndex ssIndex"
The index of the sentence-start tag (by default assignedrto \fBVocab_SentStart\fP).
.TP
.B "VocabIndex seIndex"
The index of the sentence-end tag (by default assigned to \fBVocab_SentEnd\fP).
.TP
.B "VocabIndex pauseIndex"
The index of the pause tag (by default assigned to \fBVocab_Pause\fP).
.TP
.B "Boolean unkIsWord"
When \fBtrue\fP,
the unknown word is considered a regular word (default \fBfalse\fP).
.TP
.B "Boolean toLower"
When \fBtrue\fP, all word strings are mapped to lowercase.
This is convenient to combine vocabularies, language models, etc.,
whose vocabularies differ only in the case convention
(default \fBfalse\fP).
.TP
.B "Boolean isNonEvent(VocabString \fIword\fP)"
.TP
.B "Boolean isNonEvent(VocabIndex \fIword\fP)"
Tests a word string or index for being an ``non-event'', i.e., a
token that is not assigned probability in a language model.
By default, sentence-start, pauses, and unknown words are non-events.
.TP
.B "unsigned read(File &\fIfile\fP)"
Reads word strings from a file and adds them to the vocabulary.
For convenience, only the first word on each line is significant
(so extra information could be contained in such a file).
Returns the number of words read.
.TP
.B "void write(File &\fIfile\fP, Boolean \fIsorted\fP = true)"
Write the vocabulary strings to a file in a format compatible with
\fBread()\fP.
The \fIsorted\fP argument controls whether the output is
lexicographically sorted.
.PP
Often times one wants to manipulate not single vocabulary items, but
strings of them, e.g., to represent sentences.
Word strings are represented as self-delimiting arrays of type
.B "VocabString *"
or
.BR "VocabIndex *" .
The last element in a string is 0 or \fBVocab_None\fP, respectively.
.TP
.B "unsigned getWords(const VocabIndex *\fIwids\fP, VocabString *\fIwords\fP, unsigned \fImax\fP)"
Extends \fBgetWord()\fP to strings of word.
The result is placed in \fIwords\fP, which must have room for at least
\fImax\fP words.
Returns the actual number of indices in \fIwids\fP.
.TP
.B "unsigned addWords(const VocabString *\fIwords\fP, VocabIndex *\fIwids\fP, unsigned \fImax\fP)"
Extends \fBaddWord()\fP to strings of indices.
The result is placed in \fIwids\fP, which must have room for at least
\fImax\fP indices.
Returns the actual number of words in \fIwords\fP.
.TP
.B "unsigned getIndices(const VocabString *\fIwords\fP, VocabIndex *\fIwids\fP, unsigned \fImax\fP)"
Extends \fBgetIndex()\fP to strings of indices.
The result is placed in \fIwids\fP, which must have room for at least
\fImax\fP indices.
Returns the actual number of words in \fIwords\fP.
.SH FUNCTIONS
The following static member functions are utilities to manipulate strings of
vocabulary items, independent of a particular vocabulary.
.TP
.B "unsigned parseWords(char *\fIline\fP, VocabString *\fIwords\fP, unsigned \fImax\fP)"
Parses a character string \fIline\fP into whitespace-delimited words.
On return, \fIwords\fP contains pointers to null-terminated substrings of 
\fIline\fP (whose contents is modified in the process).
\fIwords\fP must have room for at least \fImax\fP pointers.
Returns the actual number of words parsed.
.TP
.B "unsigned length(const VocabIndex *\fIwords\fP)"
.TP
.B "unsigned length(const VocabString *\fIwords\fP)"
Returns the number items in a word string.
.TP
.B "Boolean contains(const VocabIndex *\fIwords\fP, VocabIndex \fIword\fP)
Returns \fItrue\fP if the \fIword\fP occurs among \fIwords\fP.
.TP
.B "VocabIndex *reverse(VocabIndex *\fIwords\fP)"
.TP
.B "VocabString *reverse(VocabString *\fIwords\fP)"
Reverses a string of words in place (and returns it as a result).
.TP
.B "void write(File &\fIfile\fP, const VocabString *\fIwords\fP)"
Writes a string of space-delimited words to a file.
.TP
.B "int compare(VocabIndex \fIword1\fP, VocabIndex \fIword2\fP)"
.TP
.B "int compare(VocabString \fIword1\fP, VocabString \fIword2\fP)"
Compares two vocabulary items lexicographically.
Returns -1, 0, +1 for less than, equal, or greater than, respectively.
.TP
.B "int compare(const VocabIndex *\fIwords1\fP, const VocabIndex *\fIwords2\fP)"
.TP
.B "int compare(const VocabIndex *\fIwords1\fP, const VocabIndex *\fIwords2\fP)"
Extends the order of \fIcompare()\fP to strings of words.
.PP
For compatibilty with the C library calling conventions, \fBcompare()\fP
cannot be a member function of a Vocab object.
For index-based comparisons the associated vocabulary needs to be 
set globally.
This is achieved by calling the \fBcompareIndex()\fP member function
of a Vocab object.
.TP
.B "ostream &operator<< (ostream &, const VocabString *\fIwords\fP)"
.TP
.B "ostream &operator<< (ostream &, const VocabIndex *\fIwords\fP)"
These operators output strings of words to a stream.
For the second variant, the Vocab object used for interpreting indices
needs to be identified globally by calling the \fIuse()\fP member function
on the object.
.SH ITERATORS
The
.B VocabIter
class provides iteration over vocabularies.
An iteration returns the elements of a Vocab in some unspecified,
but deterministic order.
.PP
When copied or used in initialization of other objects,
VocabIter objects retain the current ``position'' in an iteration.
This allows nested iterations that enumerate all pairs of distinct elements,
etc.
.PP
NOTE: While an iteration over a Vocab object is ongoing, no modifications
are allowed to the object, \fIexcept\fP removal of the
``current'' vocabulary item.
.TP
.B "VocabIter(Vocab &\fIvocab\fP, Boolean \fIsorted\fP = false)"
Creates an iteration over \fIvocab\fP.
If \fIsorted\fP is set to \fBtrue\fP the vocabulary items will
be enumerated in lexicographic order.
.TP
.B "void init()"
Reinitializes the iteration to its beginning.
.TP
.B "VocabString next()"
.TP
.B "VocabString next(VocabIndex &\fIindex\fP)"
Steps the iteration and returns the next word string.
Optionally, the associated word index is returned in \fIindex\fP.
Returns 0 if the vocabulary is exhausted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
LM(3), File(3) 
.SH BUGS
There is no good way to synchronize VocabIndex values across
multiple Vocab objects.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>.
.br
Copyright 1995, 1996 SRI International
