.\" $Id: nbest-scripts.1,v 1.45 2016/09/20 18:50:46 stolcke Exp $
.TH nbest-scripts 1 "$Date: 2016/09/20 18:50:46 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
nbest-scripts, combine-rover-controls, compare-sclite, compute-best-rover-mix, compute-sclite-nbest, compute-sclite, fix-ctm, merge-nbest, nbest-error, nbest-posteriors, nbest-rover, nbest-vocab, nbest-words, nbest2-to-nbest1, rescore-acoustic, rescore-decipher, rescore-reweight, search-rover-combo, sentid-to-sclite \- rescore and evaluate N-best lists
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBrescore-decipher\fP [ \fB\-bytelog\fP ] [ \fB\-nodecipherlm\fP ] [ \fB\-multiwords\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-multi-char\fP \fIC\fP ] [ \fB\-pretty\fP \fImapfile\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-ngram-tool\fP \fIprogram\fP ][ \fB\-filter\fP \fIcommand\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-norescore\fP ] [ \fB\-lm-only\fP ] [ \fB\-count-oovs\fP ] [ \fB\-limit-vocab\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-vocab-aliases\fP \fImapfile\fP ] [ \fB\-fast\fP ] \\
	\fInbest-file-list\fP \fIscore-dir\fP \fB\-lm\fP ... \fIlm-options\fP ...
\fBrescore-acoustic\fP \fIold-nbest-dir\fP|\fIold-file-list\fP \fIold-ac-weight\fP \\
	\fInew-score-dir1\fP \fInew-ac-weight1\fP ... \fInew-nbest-dir\fP [ \fImax-nbest\fP ]
\fBrescore-reweight\fP [ \fB\-multiwords\fP ] [ \fB\-multi-char\fP \fIC\fP ] \fIscore-dir\fP|\fIfile-list\fP \\
	[ \fIlmw\fP [ \fIwtw\fP [ \fIscore-dir1 score-weight1\fP ... ] [ \fImax-nbest\fP ]]]
\fBrescore-minimize-wer\fP \fIscore-dir\fP [ \fIlmw\fP [ \fIwtw\fP [ \fImax-nbest\fP ]]]
\fBnbest2-to-nbest1\fP [ \fInbest-file\fP ]
\fBnbest-rover\fP [ \fIsentid-list\fP | \fB-\fP ] \fIcontrol-file\fP \\
	[ \fIposterior-file\fP [ \fInbest-lattice-options\fP ] ]
\fBcombine-rover-controls\fP [ \fBlambda=\fP\fIweights\fP ] [ \fBpostscale=\fP\fIS\fP ] \\
	[ \fBkeeppaths=1\fP ] \fIrover-control\fP [ ... ]
\fBcompute-best-rover-mix\fP [ \fBlambda=\fP\fIweights\fP ] [ \fBaddone=\fP\fIc\fP ] [ \fBprecision=\fP\fIp\fP ] \\
	[ \fBwrite_weights=\fP\fIfile\fP ] \fIreference-posteriors-output\fP
\fBsearch-rover-combo\fP [ \fB\-scorer\fP \fIscript\fP ] [ \fB\-datadir\fP \fIdir\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-weights\fP \fIweights\fP ] [ \fB\-sentids\fP \fIlist\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-refs\fP \fIrefs\fP ] [ \fB\-smooth-weight\fP \fIS\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-J\fP \fIn\fP ] \fIlist-of-control-files\fP
\fBnbest-posteriors\fP [ \fBweight=\fP\fIW\fP ] [ \fBlmw=\fP\fIlmw\fP ] [ \fBwtw=\fP\fIwtw\fP ] [ \fBpostscale=\fP\fIS\fP ] \\
	[ \fBmax_nbest=\fP\fIM\fP ] \fInbest-file\fP
\fBmerge-nbest\fP [ \fBmultiwords=1\fP ] [ \fBmultichar=\fP\fIC\fP ] [ \fBnopauses=1\fP ] \\
	[ \fBmax_nbest=\fP\fIM\fP ] \fInbest-file\fP ...
\fBnbest-vocab\fP [ \fInbest-list\fP ... ]
\fBnbest-words\fP [ \fInbest-list\fP ... ]
\fBnbest-error\fP \fIscore-dir\fP|\fIfile-list\fP \fIrefs\fP [ \fInbest-lattice-option\fP ... ]
\fBsentid-to-sclite\fP \fIhyps\fP
\fBsentid-to-ctm\fP \fIhyps\fP
\fBfix-ctm\fP \fIctmfile\fP
\fBcompute-sclite\fP \fB\-r\fP \fIrefs\fP \fB\-h\fP \fIhyps\fP [ \fB\-h\fP \fIhyps\fP ... ] [ \fB\-S\fP \fIsubset\fP ... ] \\
	[ \fB\-multiwords\fP|\fB\-M\fP ] [ \fB\-noperiods\fP ] [ \fB\-R\fP ] [ \fB\-g\fP \fIglmfile\fP ] [ \fB\-H\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-v\fP ] [ \fIsclite-options\fP ...]
\fBcompute-sclite-nbest\fP \fIfile-list\fP \fIoutput-dir\fP -r \fIrefs\fP [ \fB\-filter\fP \fIscript\fP ] [ \fIsclite-options\fP ...]
\fBcompare-sclite\fP \fB\-r\fP \fIrefs\fP \fB\-h1\fP \fIhyps1\fP \fB\-h2\fP \fIhyps2\fP [ \fB\-S\fP \fIsubset\fP ] \\
	[ \fIcompute-sclite-options\fP ... ]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These scripts perform common tasks on N-best hypotheses in 
.BR nbest-format (5),
especially those needed for rescoring and extracting and evaluating
1-best hypotheses.
.PP
.B rescore-decipher
applies a language model implemented by 
.BR ngram (1)
to the N-best lists listed in
.IR nbest-file-list .
The N-best files may be in compressed format.
The rescored N-best lists are stored in directory
.IR score-dir .
All following arguments are passed to 
.BR ngram (1)
and are used to control the language model.
The following options are handled by 
.B rescore-decipher
itself:
.TP 20
.B \-bytelog 
causes scores to be output on the bytelog scale
(see 
.BR nbest-format (1)).
.TP
.B \-nodecipherlm
indicates that the recognizer language model is not being provided
(with
.BR \-decipher-lm ).
(This is only possible if the N-best lists are not in ``NBestList1.0'' format.)
.TP
.B \-multiwords
specifies that N-best lists contain words joined by underscores, which are
to be split into their component prior to rescoring.
.TP
.BI \-multi-char " C"
defines a multiword separator character.
The default is underscore ``_''.
.TP
.BI \-pretty " mapfile"
specifies a word mapping file that allows individual words to be globally
replaced by strings of zero or more other words, e.g., to remove vocabulary
mismatches between the input N-best lists and the rescoring LM.
The 
.I mapfile
contains one mapping per line, the first field specifying the word to be
replaced and subsequent fields forming the replacement string.
.TP
.BI \-ngram-tool " program"
specifies a non-standard
.I program
to perform the actual LM evaluation
(by default, 
.BR ngram (1)
is used).
Such a program must understand
.BR ngram 's
command-line options related to N-best rescoring.
.TP
.BI \-filter " command"
specifies a
.I command
that is used to filter the N-best hypotheses prior to
evaluating the language model.
This may be used for more general textual rewriting so that non-standard
LMs can be applied.
The output N-best lists will contain the filtered hypotheses.
.TP
.B \-norescore
causes N-best lists to be simply reformatted from one of the Decipher formats
into the SRILM N-best format, separating acoustic and LM scores, without
replacing the existing LM scores.
In this case only the 
.BR ngram (1)
options
.BR \-decipher-lmw
and 
.BR \-decipher-wtw
are relevant, and others are ignored.
.B \-norescore 
and 
.B \-filter
may be used together to perform textual rewriting of N-best lists.
.TP
.B \-lm-only
dumps out LM scores only, instead of complete N-best lists.
.TP
.BR \-count-oovs
writes the count of out-of-vocabulary and zero-probability words to
the output score files (instead of rescored N-best lists).
.TP
.B \-limit-vocab
saves memory by arranging for
.BR ngram (1) 
to load only those N-gram parameters that are relevant to the vocabulary
of the N-best lists to be rescored.
After determining the N-best vocabulary the 
.B \-limit-vocab
option is passed to 
.BR ngram (1).
.TP
.BI \-vocab-aliases " map"
declares that certain words are to be treated as alternative spellings 
of the same word for LM evaluation; see the same option for 
.BR ngram (1).
The 
.I map
is filtered of unused words when used in conjunction with
.BR \-limit-vocab ,
and then passed on to 
.BR ngram (1).
.TP
.B \-fast
performs rescoring using only functions built into
.BR ngram (1).
This avoids some computational and I/O overhead and therefore runs faster,
but the options
.BR \-filter ,
.BR \-pretty ,
and 
.B \-lm-only
are not supported, and 
.B \-nodecipherlm
is obligatory.
.PP
.B rescore-acoustic
replaces the acoustic scores in a set of N-best lists by a weighted 
combination of new scores.
The old N-best lists are given by either a directory
.I old-score-dir
or a filelist
.IR old-file-list ;
.I old-ac-weight
is the weight given to the old scores.
Directories containing the new scores are listed alternating with the
corresponding weights; each score directory must contain one 
file per waveform segment, each having the same file basenames as 
the original N-best lists.
The new scores should appear in a single column per file, one per line.
The N-best lists containing the new combined acoustic scores are written to 
.IR new-nbest-dir .
The optional
.I max-nbest
argument can be used to limit the length of the N-best lists output.
Also, When a new score file is encountered containing fewer than
.I max-nbest
lines, the missing scores are set to the lowest score encountered so far.
.PP
.B rescore-reweight
combines the scores in N-best lists with a set of weights and outputs
the 1-best hypotheses.
The N-best files are found in directory
.I score-dir
or listed in
.IR file-list .
Optional arguments set the language model weight
.I lmw
(default 8),
the word transition weight
.I wtw
(default 0),
and the maximum number
.I max-nbest
of hypotheses to consider (default all).
Optionally, any number of additional score directories and associated
weights
.I "score-dir1 score-weight1 score-dir2 score-weight2"
\&... can be specified, following the
.I wtw
parameter.
These additional scores are combined with those contained in the
N-best lists themselves as in
.B rescore-acoustic 
(using unit weight for the original acoustic scores).
The
.B \-multiwords
and
.B \-multi-char
options have the same function as for
.BR rescore-decipher .
The output format for 1-best hypotheses is
.nf
	\fIsentid\fP \fIw1\fP \fIw2\fP ...
.fi
where
.I sentid
is the sentence ID derived from the N-best filename, followed by 
the words.
.PP
.B rescore-minimize-wer
is similar to 
.B rescore-reweight
but picks hypotheses using the word error minimization algorithm
of 
.BR nbest-lattice (1).
.PP
.B nbest2-to-nbest1
converts an N-best list in ``NBestList2.0'' format to ``NBestlist1.0'',
for the benefit of programs that have not yet been updated to deal with 
the new format.
.PP
.B nbest-rover
combines hypotheses from multiple N-best lists at the word level,
by performing the same kind of word error minimization as 
.BR nbest-lattice (1),
in a generalization of the ROVER algorithm.
.I sentid-list
is a file listing sentence IDs.
These must match the filenames in a set of N-best directories,
which are specified in a
.IR control-file .
The format for the latter is
.nf
	\fIdir1\fP \fIlmw1\fP \fIwtw1\fP \fIw1\fP [\fIn1\fP [\fIs1\fP]]
	\fIdir2\fP \fIlmw2\fP \fIwtw2\fP \fIw2\fP [\fIn2\fP [\fIs2\fP]]
	...
.fi
Each line specifies an N-best directory, the language model and word transition
weights to be used in score combination, and a weight to be applied to the
posterior probabilities.
An optional next-to-last parameter for each N-best list allows the lists to be 
truncated to the top \fIn1\fP, \fIn2\fP, etc., hypotheses.
The final optional parameter sets the posterior distribution scaling factor,
which defaults to the language model weight.
Optionally,
.I control-file
can also contain lines of the form
.fi
	\fIdir\fP \fIw\fP \fB+\fP
.fi
These indicate that additional score files can be found in directory
.I dir
and that the scores found therein should be added to the following 
N-best list set with weight
.IR w .
Several lines of this form may occur preceding a regular N-best
directory specification; the corresponding additive combination of multiple
scores is performed.
.br
If ``\-'' is specified for
.IR sentid-list ,
the sentence IDs are inferred from
the contents of the first directory \fIdir1\fP specified in
.IR control-file .
If
.I posterior-file
is specified on the command line, posterior word probability estimates are
written to that file.
Any additional arguments are passed as options to the underlying
.BR nbest-lattice (1)
invocation.
.br
.B nbest-rover
can process N-best lists in any of the formats described in
.BR nbest-format (5),
\fIas long as all N-best lists for a given utterance are in the same format\fP.
When Decipher formats are used only their acoustic scores are used.
.PP
.B combine-rover-controls
takes one or more
.B nbest-rover
control files as arguments and outputs a new control file that specifies
the combination of the input files.
Directory names in the input files are adjusted to reflect the relative
location of the input files,
unless the 
.B keeppaths=1
option is used.
Each input system is given equal weight,
unless the optional
.BI lambda= weights
argument is used to specify a space-separated list of system weights
(spaces in the weight vector need to be quoted on the command line).
The 
.BI postscale= S
argument overrides the posterior scaling factor in all input systems with the value
.IR S .
.PP
.B compute-best-rover-mix
estimates the best weighting of a set of nbest system outputs for 
combination with
.BR nbest-rover .
The required input file 
.I reference-posteriors-output
is produced by running 
.B nbest-rover
to record the posteriors of the reference word strings on a tuning set:
.br
	\fBnbest-rover \-\fP \fIcontrol-file\fP /dev/null \\
.br
	    \fB\-refs\fP \fIreferences\fP \\
.br
	    \fB\-write-ref-posteriors\f \fIreference-posteriors-output\fP
.br
Initial weights are specied with
.BI lambda= weights.
An additive constant for Laplace smoothing can be specified with 
.BI addone= c.
The estimated weight vector can optionally be written to a file using
.BI write_weights= file.
The weights can then be inserted into the original
.IR control-file .
.PP
.B search-rover-combo
searches for a good subset of systems to combine via 
.BR nbest-rover .
It performs a greedy search starting with the system that gives the lowest individual error, 
and then adds one system at a time until no further error reduction is possible.
The required argument \fIlist-of-control-files\fP is a file listing the nbest-rover control files
representating the individual systems to be combined.
An nbest-rover control file is written to stdout representing the combined system.
Options are:
.TP 20
.BI \-scorer " script"
Specifies a script that evaluates a hypothesis file.
The script must take a single argument that is a hypothesis file in sentid format and output a single number
(the error rate) to stdout.
For example, the script could be based on parsing 
.B  compute-sclite
output, but must know where to find the reference file etc.
.TP
.BI \-weights " list-of-weights"
Specifies the list of system weights to try when adding a system.
By default this is just 1, but can be a space-separated list of weights, such as "1 0.5 0.2 0.1".
.TP
.BI \-sentids " list"
A list of sentence IDs to perform the evaluation on (as in the first argument to
.BR nbest-rover ),
.TP
.BI \-datadir " dir"
Where to place auxiliary data files.
By default this is 
.B SEARCH-DATA
in the current directory.
.TP
.BI \-refs " refs"
Triggers system weight optimization using 
.B compute-best-rover-mix
for each system combination before evaluating
its error rate.
The file 
.I refs
should point to a reference file in sentid format.
Note that these references are not used to evaluate the error rate of a system 
(which is done within the scorer script, see above) but only to be 
passed to 
.BR compute-best-rover-mix .
This option overrides the 
.B \-weights
option since system weights are estimated.
.TP
.BI \-smooth-weight " S"
Enables hierarchical weight smoothing.
Each weight estimate is interpolated with the previous estimate (with one fewer systems);
the previous weight vector gets weight
.IR S .
.TP
.BI \-J " n"
Parallelize the evalation of system combinations with up to 
.I n
parallel jobs.
This uses the included parallelization script
.BR rexport.gnumake ,
but the environment variable 
.B REXPORT
may be set to a command that takes a list of command lines as argument and executes them in an appropriate manner.
.PP
.B nbest-posteriors
rescales the scores in an N-best list to reflect (weighted) posterior
probabilities.
The output is the same N-best list with acoustic scores set to
the log (base 10) of the posterior hyp probabilities and LM scores set to zero.
.BI postscale= S
attenuates the posterior distribution by dividing combined log 
scores by
.I S
(the default is
.IR S = lmw ).
If
.BI weight= W
is specified the posteriors are multiplied by
.IR W .
.BI max_nbest= M
limits the number of hypotheses used to the top 
.IR M .
This script is used mostly as a helper in
.BR nbest-rover .
.PP
.B merge-nbest
merges hypotheses from one or more N-best lists into a single list,
collapsing hypotheses that occur in more than one input list.
If all input lists use the same 
.BR nbest-format (5)
then the output will also be in that format and contain the information
from the first list in which a hypothesis was encountered.
Otherwise, the output will be in SRI Decipher(TM) NBestList1.0 format
and contain acoustic scores and word strings only.
The
.BI max_nbest= M
option limits input to the first 
.I M
hypotheses from each input list.
.B multiwords=1
merges hypotheses that are identical after resolving multiwords, with 
.BI multichar= C
defining a non-default multiword separator character.
.B nopauses=1
merges hypotheses that are identical after removal of pause words.
.PP
.B nbest-vocab
outputs the vocabulary used in a set of N-best lists.
(The N-best files cannot be compressed, but may be concatenated and
supplied via stdin.)
.PP
.B nbest-words
strips any score and alignment information from N-best lists and outputs
only the words, one hypothesis per line.
.PP
.B nbest-error
computes the overall oracle word error rate of a set of N-best lists
in directory
.I score-dir
or listed in
.IR file-list .
The reference answers are given in
.I refs 
in the format output by 
.B rescore-reweight 
(see above).
Additional arguments are passed to the underlying invocation of
.BR nbest-lattice (1),
and can be used to limit the depth of the N-best list,
compute lattice error rather than N-best error, etc.
.PP
.B sentid-to-sclite
converts 1-best hypotheses and references in the format used here to
the ``trn'' format expected by the NIST
.BR sclite (1)
scoring software.
.PP
.B sentid-to-ctm
converts 1-best hypotheses and references in the format used here to NIST
.BR ctm (5)
format.
The script relies on an encoding of conversation IDs, channel, and utterance
time marks in the sentence IDs and may need adjustment to local conventions.
.PP
.B fix-ctm
converts output produced by the
.B \-output-ctm
option of 
.BR nbest-lattice (1)
and
.BR lattice-tool (1)
to a format suitable for scoring with NIST
.BR sclite (1).
It, too, relies on information encoded in the sentids IDs and may need
adjustments.
.PP
.B compute-sclite
is a wrapper around 
the NIST 
.BR sclite (1)
scoring tool.
.I refs
and
.I hyps 
are the reference and hypothesized transcripts, respectively. 
The
.I refs
file can be either in "sentid" format or in 
.BR stm (5) 
format.  In the latter case,
.I hyps
will be converted to 
.BR ctm (5)
format using the 
.B sentid-to-ctm
helper script.
The
.I hyps
file can be either in "sentid" format or in 
.BR ctm (5)
format.
More than one 
.B \-h 
option can be given to combine the contents of multiple hypotheses files.
Optionally, 
.B \-S 
specifies a
sorted list of sentence IDs
.I subset
to score.
Multiple 
.B \-S 
options may be given, to form the intersection of several subsets.
.B \-multiwords 
or
.B \-M
splits ``multiwords'' joined by underscores into their component words
prior to scoring.
.B \-noperiods
deletes periods from the hypotheses prior to scoring
(typically used to bridge different conventions for spelled letters).
.B \-R
preserves reject words in the hypotheses for scoring (as appropriate if
references also contain rejects).
.B \-g
.I glmfile
enables filtering of references and hypotheses by the NIST
.B csrfilt.sh
script, controlled by the filter file 
.I glmfile 
(this is only possible with an stm reference file).
In that case, the
.B \-H
option causes hesitations (as defined by the filter)
to be deleted from the output for scoring purposes.
.B \-v 
displays the complete command used to invoke
.BR sclite .
Any additional options are passed to
.BR sclite ,
e.g., to control its output actions or alignment mode.
.PP
.B compute-sclite-nbest
runs 
.B compute-sclite
on a set of N-best lists specified by 
.I file-list
and deposits the error counts in a directory
.IR output-dir .
These error counts may be used with the 
.BR nbest-optimize (1)
.B \-errors
option to specify the hypothesis-level errors explicitly.
The references must be given in a file
.I refs
one per line, with the first word in each line matching
the file basename of the corresponding N-best list.
Additional options to be passed to 
.B compute-sclite 
(and ultimately to 
.BR sclite (1))
may be specified at the end of the command line.
The
.B \-filter 
option specifies a filtering
.I script
that edits the hypotheses before error computation.
.PP
.B compare-sclite
scores two sets of hypotheses 
.I hyps1
and
.I hyps2
for the same test set and computes in
how many cases the first or second set had lower word error.
The remaining options are as for
.BR compute-sclite .
The script ignores hypotheses for sentence that do not appear in both
hypothesis files, to ensure comparable scoring results.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
nbest-format(5), ngram(1), nbest-lattice(1), nbest-optimize(1), sclite(1),
stm(5), ctm(5).
.br
J.G. Fiscus, A Post-Processing System to Yield Reduced Word Error Rates:
Recognizer Output Voting Error Reduction (ROVER),
\fIProc. IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop\fP,
Santa Barbara, CA, 347\-352, 1997.
.br
A. Stolcke et al., "The SRI March 2000 Hub-5 Conversational Speech
Transcription System",
\fIProc. NIST Speech Transcription Workshop\fP, College Park, MD, 2000.
.SH BUGS
.B sentid-to-sclite
has some assumptions about the structure of sentence IDs built-in and
may need to be modified for 
.B compute-sclite
and 
.B compare-sclite 
to work.
.PP
.B rescore-decipher 
.B \-pretty
may not work correctly with the
.B \-limit-vocab
option if the word mapping adds to the vocabulary subset used in the N-best
lists.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <andreas.stolcke@microsoft.com>
.br
Copyright 1995-2006 SRI International
.br
Copyright 2011-2016 Microsoft Corp.
