.\" $Id: ngram.1,v 1.84 2015-10-13 21:08:30 stolcke Exp $
.TH ngram 1 "$Date: 2015-10-13 21:08:30 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
ngram \- apply N-gram language models
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBngram\fP [ \fB\-help\fP ] \fIoption\fP ...
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ngram
performs various operations with N-gram-based and related language models,
including sentence scoring, perplexity computation, sentences generation,
and various types of model interpolation.
The N-gram language models are read from files in ARPA
.BR ngram-format (5);
various extended language model formats are described with the options
below.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
Each filename argument can be an ASCII file, or a 
compressed file (name ending in .Z or .gz), or ``-'' to indicate
stdin/stdout.
.TP
.B \-help
Print option summary.
.TP
.B \-version
Print version information.
.TP
.BI \-order " n"
Set the maximal N-gram order to be used, by default 3.
NOTE: The order of the model is not set automatically when a model
file is read, so the same file can be used at various orders.
To use models of order higher than 3 it is always necessary to specify this
option.
.TP
.BI \-debug " level"
Set the debugging output level (0 means no debugging output).
Debugging messages are sent to stderr, with the exception of 
.B \-ppl 
output as explained below.
.TP
.B \-memuse
Print memory usage statistics for the LM.
.PP
The following options determine the type of LM to be used.
.TP
.B \-null
Use a `null' LM as the main model (one that gives probability 1 to all words).
This is useful in combination with mixture creation or for debugging.
.TP
.BI \-use-server " S"
Use a network LM server (typically implemented by 
.B ngram
with the 
.B \-server-port
option) as the main model.
The server specification
.I S
can be an unsigned integer port number (referring to a server port running on
the local host),
a hostname (referring to default port 2525 on the named host),
or a string of the form 
.IR port @ host ,
where
.I port 
is a portnumber and 
.I host
is either a hostname ("dukas.speech.sri.com")
or IP number in dotted-quad format ("140.44.1.15").
.br
For server-based LMs, the
.B \-order
option limits the context length of N-grams queried by the client
(with 0 denoting unlimited length).
Hence, the effective LM order is the mimimum of the client-specified value
and any limit implemented in the server.
.br
When
.B \-use-server 
is specified, the arguments to the options
.BR \-mix-lm ,
.BR \-mix-lm2 ,
etc. are also interpreted as network LM server specifications provided
they contain a '@' character and do not contain a '/' character.
This allows the creation of mixtures of several file- and/or
network-based LMs.
.TP
.B \-cache-served-ngrams
Enables client-side caching of N-gram probabilities to eliminated duplicate
network queries, in conjunction with
.BR \-use-server .
This results in a substantial speedup for typical tasks (especially N-best
rescoring) but requires memory in the client that may grow linearly with the
amount of data processed.
.TP
.BI \-lm " file"
Read the (main) N-gram model from
.IR file .
This option is always required, unless 
.B \-null
was chosen.
Unless modified by other options, the 
.I file
is assumed to contain an N-gram backoff language model in
.BR ngram-format (5).
.TP
.B \-tagged
Interpret the LM as containing word/tag N-grams.
.TP
.B \-skip
Interpret the LM as a ``skip'' N-gram model.
.TP
.BI \-hidden-vocab " file"
Interpret the LM as an N-gram model containing hidden events between words.
The list of hidden event tags is read from
.IR file .
.br
Hidden event definitions may also follow the N-gram definitions in 
the LM file (the argument to 
.BR \-lm ).
The format for such definitions is
.nf
	\fIevent\fP [\fB\-delete\fP \fID\fP] [\fB\-repeat\fP \fIR\fP] [\fB\-insert\fP \fIw\fP] [\fB\-observed\fP] [\fB\-omit\fP]
.fi
The optional flags after the event name modify the default behavior of 
hidden events in the model.
By default events are unobserved pseudo-words of which at most one can occur
between regular words, and which are added to the context to predict
following words and events.
(A typical use would be to model hidden sentence boundaries.)
.B \-delete
indicates that upon encountering the event,
.I D 
words are deleted from the next word's context.
.B \-repeat
indicates that after the event the next
.I R
words from the context are to be repeated.
.B \-insert
specifies that an (unobserved) word 
.I w
is to be inserted into the history.
.B \-observed 
specifies the event tag is not hidden, but observed in the word stream.
.B \-omit
indicates that the event tag itself is not to be added to the history for
predicting the following words.
.br
The hidden event mechanism represents a generalization of the disfluency
LM enabled by 
.BR \-df .
.TP
.BI \-hidden-not
Modifies processing of hidden event N-grams for the case that 
the event tags are embedded in the word stream, as opposed to inferred 
through dynamic programming.
.TP
.B \-df
Interpret the LM as containing disfluency events.
This enables an older form of hidden-event LM used in
Stolcke & Shriberg (1996).
It is roughly equivalent to a hidden-event LM with
.nf
	UH -observed -omit		(filled pause)
	UM -observed -omit		(filled pause)
	@SDEL -insert <s>		(sentence restart)
	@DEL1 -delete 1 -omit	(1-word deletion)
	@DEL2 -delete 2 -omit	(2-word deletion)
	@REP1 -repeat 1 -omit	(1-word repetition)
	@REP2 -repeat 2 -omit	(2-word repetition)
.fi
.TP
.BI \-classes " file"
Interpret the LM as an N-gram over word classes.
The expansions of the classes are given in
.IR file 
in 
.BR classes-format (5).
Tokens in the LM that are not defined as classes in
.I file 
are assumed to be plain words, so that the LM can contain mixed N-grams over
both words and word classes.
.br
Class definitions may also follow the N-gram definitions in the 
LM file (the argument to 
.BR \-lm ).
In that case 
.BR "\-classes /dev/null"
should be specified to trigger interpretation of the LM as a class-based model.
Otherwise, class definitions specified with this option override any
definitions found in the LM file itself.
.TP
.BR \-simple-classes
Assume a "simple" class model: each word is member of at most one word class,
and class expansions are exactly one word long.
.TP
.BI \-expand-classes " k"
Replace the read class-N-gram model with an (approximately) equivalent
word-based N-gram.
The argument
.I k
limits the length of the N-grams included in the new model
(\c
.IR k =0
allows N-grams of arbitrary length).
.TP
.BI \-expand-exact " k"
Use a more exact (but also more expensive) algorithm to compute the 
conditional probabilities of N-grams expanded from classes, for
N-grams of length
.I k
or longer
(\c
.IR k =0
is a special case and the default, it disables the exact algorithm for all
N-grams).
The exact algorithm is recommended for class-N-gram models that contain
multi-word class expansions, for N-gram lengths exceeding the order of 
the underlying class N-grams.
.TP
.BI \-codebook " file"
Read a codebook for quantized log probabilies from 
.IR file .
The parameters in an N-gram language model file specified by 
.B \-lm 
are then assumed to represent codebook indices instead of 
log probabilities.
.TP
.B \-decipher
Use the N-gram model exactly as the Decipher(TM) recognizer would,
i.e., choosing the backoff path if it has a higher probability than
the bigram transition, and rounding log probabilities to bytelog
precision.
.TP
.B \-factored
Use a factored N-gram model, i.e., a model that represents words as 
vectors of feature-value pairs and models sequences of words by a set of 
conditional dependency relations between factors.
Individual dependencies are modeled by standard N-gram LMs, allowing
however for a generalized backoff mechanism to combine multiple backoff
paths (Bilmes and Kirchhoff 2003).
The 
.BR \-lm ,
.BR \-mix-lm ,
etc. options name FLM specification files in the format described in
Kirchhoff et al. (2002).
.TP
.B \-hmm
Use an HMM of N-grams language model.
The 
.B \-lm
option specifies a file that describes a probabilistic graph, with each
line corresponding to a node or state.
A line has the format:
.nf
	\fIstatename\fP \fIngram-file\fP \fIs1\fP \fIp1\fP \fIs2\fP \fIp2\fP ...
.fi
where 
.I statename 
is a string identifying the state,
.I ngram-file
names a file containing a backoff N-gram model,
.IR s1 , s2 ,
\&... are names of follow-states, and 
.IR p1 , p2 ,
\&... are the associated transition probabilities.
A filename of ``-'' can be used to indicate the N-gram model data
is included in the HMM file, after the current line.
(Further HMM states may be specified after the N-gram data.)
.br
The names
.B INITIAL
and
.B FINAL
denote the start and end states, respectively, and have no associated
N-gram model (\c
.I ngram-file
must be specified as ``.'' for these).
The 
.B \-order
option specifies the maximal N-gram length in the component models.
.br
The semantics of an HMM of N-grams is as follows: as each state is visited,
words are emitted from the associated N-gram model.
The first state (corresponding to the start-of-sentence) is
.BR INITIAL .
A state is left with the probability of the end-of-sentence token
in the respective model, and the next state is chosen according to
the state transition probabilities.
Each state has to emit at least one word.
The actual end-of-sentence is emitted if and only if the
.B FINAL
state is reached.
Each word probability is conditioned on all preceding words, regardless 
of whether they were emitted in the same or a previous state.
.TP
.BI \-count-lm 
Use a count-based interpolated LM.
The 
.B \-lm
option specifies a file that describes a set of N-gram counts along with
interpolation weights, based on which Jelinek-Mercer smoothing in the
formulation of Chen and Goodman (1998) is performed.
The file format is
.nf
	\fBorder\fP \fIN\fP
	\fBvocabsize\fP \fIV\fP
	\fBtotalcount\fP \fIC\fP
	\fBmixweights\fP \fIM\fP
	 \fIw01\fP \fIw02\fP ... \fIw0N\fP
	 \fIw11\fP \fIw12\fP ... \fIw1N\fP
	 ...
	 \fIwM1\fP \fIwM2\fP ... \fIwMN\fP
	\fBcountmodulus\fP \fIm\fP
	\fBgoogle-counts\fP \fIdir\fP
	\fBcounts\fP \fIfile\fP
.fi
Here 
.I N
is the model order (maximal N-gram length), although as with backoff models,
the actual value used is overridden by the
.B \-order
command line when the model is read in.
.I V
gives the vocabulary size and
.I C 
the sum of all unigram counts.
.I M
specifies the number of mixture weight bins (minus 1).
.I m
is the width of a mixture weight bin.
Thus, 
.I wij
is the mixture weight used to interpolate an
.IR j -th
order maximum-likelihood estimate with lower-order estimates given that
the (\fIj\fP-1)-gram context has been seen with a frequency
between
.IR i * m
and
.RI ( i +1)* m -1
times.
(For contexts with frequency greater than 
.IR M * m ,
the 
.IR i = M
weights are used.)
The N-gram counts themselves are given in an
indexed directory structure rooted at
.IR dir ,
in an external
.IR file ,
or, if 
.I file
is the string 
.BR -  ,
starting on the line following the
.B counts
keyword.
.TP
.B \-msweb-lm 
Use a Microsoft Web N-gram language model.
The 
.B \-lm
option specifies a file that contains the parameters for retrieving 
N-gram probabilities from the service described at
http://web-ngram.research.microsoft.com/ and in Gao et al. (2010).
The 
.B \-cache-served-ngrams
option applies, and causes N-gram probabilities
retrieved from the server to be stored for later reuse.
The file format expected by 
.B \-lm
is as follows, with default values listed after each parameter name:
.nf
	\fBservername\fP web-ngram.research.microsoft.com
	\fBserverport\fP 80
	\fBurlprefix\fP /rest/lookup.svc
	\fBusertoken\fP \fIxxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx\fP
	\fBcatalog\fP bing-body
	\fBversion\fP jun09
	\fBmodelorder\fP \fIN\fP
	\fBcacheorder\fP 0 (\fIN\fP with \fB\-cache-served-ngrams\fP)
	\fBmaxretries\fP 2
.fi
The string following 
.B usertoken
is obligatory and is a user-specific key that must be obtained by emailing
<webngram@microsoft.com>.
The language model order 
.I N
defaults to the value of the
.BR \-order 
option.
It is recommended that
.B modelorder
be specified in case the
.BR \-order 
argument exceeds the server's model order.
Note also that the LM thus created will have no predefined vocabulary.
Any operations that rely on the vocabulary being known (such as sentence
generation) will require one to be specified explicitly with
.BR \-vocab .
.TP
.B \-maxent
Read a maximum entropy N-gram model.
The model file is specified by 
.BR \-lm .
.TP
.B \-mix-maxent
Indicates that all mixture model components specified by 
.B \-mix-lm 
and related options are maxent models.
Without this option, an interpolation of a single 
maxent model (specified by 
.BR \-lm )
with standard backoff models (specified by
.B \-mix-lm 
etc.) is performed.
The option
.BI \-bayes " N"
should also be given,
unless used in combination with 
.B \-maxent-convert-to-arpa
(see below).
.TP
.BI \-maxent-convert-to-arpa
Indicates that the
.B \-lm
option specifies a maxent model file, but 
that the model is to be converted to a backoff model
using the algorithm by Wu (2002).
This option also triggers conversion of maxent models used with
.BR \-mix-maxent .
.TP
.BI \-vocab " file"
Initialize the vocabulary for the LM from
.IR file .
This is especially useful if the LM itself does not specify a complete
vocabulary, e.g., as with
.BR \-null .
.TP
.BI \-vocab-aliases " file"
Reads vocabulary alias definitions from
.IR file ,
consisting of lines of the form
.nf
	\fIalias\fP \fIword\fP
.fi
This causes all tokens
.I alias
to be mapped to
.IR word .
.TP
.BI \-nonevents " file"
Read a list of words from
.I file
that are to be considered non-events, i.e., that
should only occur in LM contexts, but not as predictions.
Such words are excluded from sentence generation
.RB ( \-gen )
and
probability summation
.RB ( "\-ppl \-debug 3" ).
.TP
.B \-limit-vocab
Discard LM parameters on reading that do not pertain to the words 
specified in the vocabulary.
The default is that words used in the LM are automatically added to the 
vocabulary.
This option can be used to reduce the memory requirements for large LMs 
that are going to be evaluated only on a small vocabulary subset.
.TP
.B \-unk
Indicates that the LM contains the unknown word, i.e., is an open-class LM.
.TP
.BI \-map-unk " word"
Map out-of-vocabulary words to 
.IR word ,
rather than the default
.B <unk>
tag.
.TP
.B \-tolower
Map all vocabulary to lowercase.
Useful if case conventions for text/counts and language model differ.
.TP
.B \-multiwords
Split input words consisting of multiwords joined by underscores
into their components, before evaluating LM probabilities.
.TP
.BI \-multi-char " C"
Character used to delimit component words in multiwords
(an underscore character by default).
.TP
.BI \-zeroprob-word " W"
If a word token is assigned a probability of zero by the LM,
look up the word 
.I W
instead.
This is useful to avoid zero probabilities when processing input
with an LM that is mismatched in vocabulary.
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm " file"
Read a second N-gram model for interpolation purposes.
The second and any additional interpolated models can also be class N-grams
(using the same
.B \-classes 
definitions), but are otherwise constrained to be standard N-grams, i.e.,
the options
.BR \-df ,
.BR \-tagged ,
.BR \-skip ,
and
.B \-hidden-vocab 
do not apply to them.
.br
.B NOTE:
Unless 
.B \-bayes
(see below) is specified,
.B \-mix-lm
triggers a static interpolation of the models in memory.
In most cases a more efficient, dynamic interpolation is sufficient, requested
by 
.BR "\-bayes 0" .
Also, mixing models of different type (e.g., word-based and class-based)
will
.I only
work correctly with dynamic interpolation.
.TP
.BI \-lambda " weight"
Set the weight of the main model when interpolating with
.BR \-mix-lm .
Default value is 0.5.
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm2 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm3 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm4 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm5 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm6 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm7 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm8 " file"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm9 " file"
Up to 9 more N-gram models can be specified for interpolation.
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda2 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda3 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda4 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda5 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda6 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda7 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda8 " weight"
.TP
.BI \-mix-lambda9 " weight"
These are the weights for the additional mixture components, corresponding
to
.B \-mix-lm2
through
.BR \-mix-lm9 .
The weight for the
.B \-mix-lm 
model is 1 minus the sum of 
.B \-lambda
and 
.B \-mix-lambda2
through
.BR \-mix-lambda9 .
.TP
.B \-loglinear-mix
Implement a log-linear (rather than linear) mixture LM, using the 
parameters above.
.TP
.BR \-context-priors " file"
Read context-dependent mixture weight priors from
.IR file .
Each line in 
.I file 
should contain a context N-gram (most recent word first) followed by a vector 
of mixture weights whose length matches the number of LMs being interpolated.
(This and the following options currently only apply to linear interpolation.)
.TP
.BI \-bayes " length"
Interpolate models using posterior probabilities
based on the likelihoods of local N-gram contexts of length
.IR length .
The 
.B \-lambda 
values are used as prior mixture weights in this case.
This option can also be combined with
.BR \-context-priors ,
in which case the 
.I length
parameter also controls how many words of context are maximally used to look up
mixture weights.
If 
.BR \-context-priors
is used without 
.BR \-bayes ,
the context length used is set by the
.B \-order 
option and a merged (statically interpolated) N-gram model is created.
.TP
.BI \-bayes-scale " scale"
Set the exponential scale factor on the context likelihoods in conjunction
with the
.B \-bayes
function.
Default value is 1.0.
.TP
.B \-read-mix-lms
Read a list of linearly interpolated (mixture) LMs and their weights from the
.I file
specified with 
.BR \-lm ,
instead of gathering this information from the command line options above.
Each line in 
.I file
starts with the filename containing the component LM, followed by zero or more
component-specific options:
.RS
.TP 15
.BI \-weight " W" 
the prior weight given to the component LM
.TP
.BI \-order " N" 
the maximal ngram order to use
.TP
.BI \-type " T"
the LM type, one of 
.B ARPA
(the default), 
.BR COUNTLM ,
.BR MAXENT ,
.BR LMCLIENT ,
or
.B MSWEBLM 
.TP
.BI \-classes " C"
the word class definitions for the component LM (which must be of type ARPA)
.TP
.B \-cache-served-ngrams
enables client-side caching for LMs of type LMCLIENT or MSWEBLM.
.PP
The global options 
.BR \-bayes ,
.BR \-bayes-scale ,
and 
.B \-context-priors 
still apply with
.BR \-read-mix-lms .
When
.BR \-bayes 
is NOT used, the interpolation is static by ngram merging, and forces all 
component LMs to be of type ARPA or MAXENT.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-cache " length"
Interpolate the main LM (or the one resulting from operations above) with
a unigram cache language model based on a history of
.I length
words.
.TP
.BI \-cache-lambda " weight"
Set interpolation weight for the cache LM.
Default value is 0.05.
.TP
.BI \-dynamic
Interpolate the main LM (or the one resulting from operations above) with
a dynamically changing LM.
LM changes are indicated by the tag ``<LMstate>'' starting a line in the
input to
.BR -ppl ,
.BR -counts ,
or
.BR -rescore ,
followed by a filename containing the new LM.
.TP
.BI \-dynamic-lambda " weight"
Set interpolation weight for the dynamic LM.
Default value is 0.05.
.TP
.BI \-adapt-marginals " LM"
Use an LM obtained by adapting the unigram marginals to the values specified
in the
.I LM
in
.BR ngram-format (5),
using the method described in Kneser et al. (1997).
The LM to be adapted is that constructed according to the other options.
.TP
.BI \-base-marginals " LM"
Specify the baseline unigram marginals in a separate file 
.IR LM ,
which must be in
.BR ngram-format (5)
as well.
If not specified, the baseline marginals are taken from the model to be
adapted, but this might not be desirable, e.g., when Kneser-Ney smoothing
was used.
.TP
.BI \-adapt-marginals-beta " B"
The exponential weight given to the ratio between adapted and baseline
marginals.
The default is 0.5.
.TP
.BI \-adapt-marginals-ratios
Compute and output only the log ratio between the adapted and the baseline
LM probabilities.
These can be useful as a separate knowledge source in N-best rescoring.
.PP
The following options specify the operations performed on/with the LM
constructed as per the options above.
.TP
.B \-renorm
Renormalize the main model by recomputing backoff weights for the given
probabilities.
.TP
.BI \-prune " threshold"
Prune N-gram probabilities if their removal causes (training set)
perplexity of the model to increase by less than
.I threshold
relative.
.TP
.BI \-prune-history-lm " L" 
Read a separate LM from file
.I L
and use it to obtain the history marginal probabilities required for 
computing the entropy loss incurred by pruning an N-gram.
The LM needs to only be of an order one less than the LM being pruned.
If this option is not used the LM being pruned is used to compute 
history marginals.
This option is useful because, as pointed out by Chelba et al. (2010),
the lower-order N-gram probabilities in Kneser-Ney smoothed LMs are
unsuitable for this purpose.
.TP
.B \-prune-lowprobs
Prune N-gram probabilities that are lower than the corresponding
backed-off estimates.
This generates N-gram models that can be correctly
converted into probabilistic finite-state networks.
.TP
.BI \-minprune " n"
Only prune N-grams of length at least
.IR n .
The default (and minimum allowed value) is 2, i.e., only unigrams are excluded
from pruning.
This option applies to both
.B \-prune
and
.BR \-prune-lowprobs .
.TP
.BI \-rescore-ngram " file"
Read an N-gram LM from 
.I file
and recompute its N-gram probabilities using the LM specified by the
other options; then renormalize and evaluate the resulting new N-gram LM.
.TP
.BI \-write-lm " file"
Write a model back to
.IR file .
The output will be in the same format as read by
.BR \-lm ,
except if operations such as 
.B \-mix-lm
or 
.B \-expand-classes 
were applied, in which case the output will contain the generated
single N-gram backoff model in ARPA
.BR ngram-format (5).
.TP
.BI \-write-bin-lm " file"
Write a model to
.I file
using a binary data format.
This is only supported by certain model types, specifically, 
those based on N-gram backoff models and N-gram counts.
Binary model files are recognized automatically by the
.B \-read
function.
If an LM class does not provide a binary format the default (text) format
will be output instead.
.TP
.BI \-write-vocab " file"
Write the LM's vocabulary to
.IR file .
.TP
.BI \-gen " number"
Generate
.I number
random sentences from the LM.
.TP
.BI \-gen-prefixes " file"
Read a list of sentence prefixes from 
.I file
and generate random word strings conditioned on them, one per line.
(Note: The start-of-sentence tag
.B <s> 
is not automatically added to these prefixes.)
.TP
.BI \-seed " value"
Initialize the random number generator used for sentence generation
using seed
.IR value .
The default is to use a seed that should be close to unique for each
invocation of the program.
.TP
.BI \-ppl " textfile"
Compute sentence scores (log probabilities) and perplexities from
the sentences in
.IR textfile ,
which should contain one sentence per line.
The
.B \-debug
option controls the level of detail printed, even though output is
to stdout (not stderr).
.RS
.TP 10
.B "\-debug 0"
Only summary statistics for the entire corpus are printed,
as well as partial statistics for each input portion delimited by 
escaped lines (see
.BR \-escape ).
These statistics include the number of sentences, words, out-of-vocabulary
words and zero-probability tokens in the input,
as well as its total log probability and perplexity.
Perplexity is given with two different normalizations: counting all
input tokens (``ppl'') and excluding end-of-sentence tags (``ppl1'').
.TP
.B "\-debug 1"
Statistics for individual sentences are printed.
.TP
.B "\-debug 2"
Probabilities for each word, plus LM-dependent details about backoff
used etc., are printed.
.TP
.B "\-debug 3"
Probabilities for all words are summed in each context, and
the sum is printed.
If this differs significantly from 1, a warning message
to stderr will be issued.
.TP
.B "\-debug 4"
Outputs ranking statistics (number of times the actual word's probability
was ranked in top 1, 5, 10 among all possible words,
both excluding and including end-of-sentence tokens),
as well as quadratic and absolute loss averages (based on 
how much actual word probability differs from 1).
.RE
.TP
.B \-text-has-weights
Treat the first field on each
.B \-ppl
input line as a weight factor by
which the statistics for that sentence are to be multiplied.
.TP
.BI \-nbest " file"
Read an N-best list in
.BR nbest-format (5)
and rerank the hypotheses using the specified LM.
The reordered N-best list is written to stdout.
If the N-best list is given in
``NBestList1.0'' format and contains 
composite acoustic/language model scores, then
.B \-decipher-lm
and the recognizer language model and word transition weights (see below)
need to be specified so the original acoustic scores can be recovered.
.TP
.BI \-nbest-files " filelist"
Process multiple N-best lists whose filenames are listed in
.IR filelist .
.TP
.BI \-write-nbest-dir " dir"
Deposit rescored N-best lists into directory 
.IR dir ,
using filenames derived from the input ones.
.TP
.B \-decipher-nbest
Output rescored N-best lists in Decipher 1.0 format, rather than 
SRILM format.
.TP
.B \-no-reorder
Output rescored N-best lists without sorting the hypotheses by their
new combined scores.
.TP
.B \-split-multiwords
Split multiwords into their components when reading N-best lists;
the rescored N-best lists thus no longer contain multiwords.
(Note this is different from the
.B \-multiwords
option, which leaves the input word stream unchanged and splits
multiwords only for the purpose of LM probability computation.)
.TP
.BI \-max-nbest " n"
Limits the number of hypotheses read from an N-best list.
Only the first
.I n
hypotheses are processed.
.TP
.BI \-rescore " file"
Similar to
.BR \-nbest ,
but the input is processed as a stream of N-best hypotheses (without header).
The output consists of the rescored hypotheses in
SRILM format (the third of the formats described in
.BR nbest-format (5)).
.TP
.BI \-decipher-lm " model-file"
Designates the N-gram backoff model (typically a bigram) that was used by the
Decipher(TM) recognizer in computing composite scores for the hypotheses fed to
.B \-rescore
or
.BR \-nbest .
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores.
.TP
.BI \-decipher-order " N"
Specifies the order of the Decipher N-gram model used (default is 2).
.TP
.B \-decipher-nobackoff 
Indicates that the Decipher N-gram model does not contain backoff nodes,
i.e., all recognizer LM scores are correct up to rounding. 
.TP
.BI \-decipher-lmw " weight"
Specifies the language model weight used by the recognizer.
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores.
.TP
.BI \-decipher-wtw " weight"
Specifies the word transition weight used by the recognizer.
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores.
.TP
.BI \-escape " string"
Set an ``escape string'' for the
.BR \-ppl ,
.BR \-counts ,
and
.B \-rescore
computations.
Input lines starting with
.I string
are not processed as sentences and passed unchanged to stdout instead.
This allows associated information to be passed to scoring scripts etc.
.TP
.BI \-counts " countsfile"
Perform a computation similar to 
.BR \-ppl ,
but based only on the N-gram counts found in 
.IR countsfile .
Probabilities are computed for the last word of each N-gram, using the
other words as contexts, and scaling by the associated N-gram count.
Summary statistics are output at the end, as well as before each
escaped input line if 
.B \-debug 
level 1 or higher is set.
.TP
.BI \-count-order " n"
Use only counts up to order
.I n
in the
.B \-counts
computation.
The default value is the order of the LM (the value specified by 
.BR \-order ).
.TP
.B \-float-counts
Allow processing of fractional counts with
.BR \-counts .
.TP
.B \-counts-entropy
Weight the log probabilities for 
.B \-counts
processing by the join probabilities of the N-grams.
This effectively computes the sum over p(w,h) log p(w|h),
i.e., the entropy of the model.
In debugging mode, both the conditional log probabilities and the 
corresponding joint probabilities are output.
.TP
.BI \-server-port " P"
Start a network server that listens on port 
.I P
and returns N-gram probabilities.
The server will write a one-line "ready" message and then read N-grams, 
one per line.
For each N-gram, a conditional log probability is computed as specified by 
other options, and written back to the client (in text format).
The server will continue accepting connections until killed by an external
signal.
.TP
.BI \-server-maxclients " M"
Limits the number of simultaneous connections accepted by the network LM
server to 
.IR M .
Once the limit is reached, additional connection requests
(e.g., via 
.BR ngram
.BR \-use-server )
will hang until another client terminates its connection.
.TP
.B \-skipoovs
Instruct the LM to skip over contexts that contain out-of-vocabulary
words, instead of using a backoff strategy in these cases.
.TP
.BI \-noise " noise-tag"
Designate
.I noise-tag
as a vocabulary item that is to be ignored by the LM.
(This is typically used to identify a noise marker.)
Note that the LM specified by
.B \-decipher-lm
does NOT ignore this
.I noise-tag
since the DECIPHER recognizer treats noise as a regular word.
.TP
.BI \-noise-vocab " file"
Read several noise tags from
.IR file ,
instead of, or in addition to, the single noise tag specified by
.BR \-noise .
.TP
.B \-reverse
Reverse the words in a sentence for LM scoring purposes.
(This assumes the LM used is a ``right-to-left'' model.)
Note that the LM specified by
.B \-decipher-lm
is always applied to the original, left-to-right word sequence.
.TP
.B \-no-sos
Disable the automatic insertion of start-of-sentence tokens for 
sentence probability computation.
The probability of the initial word is thus computed with an empty context.
.TP
.B \-no-eos
Disable the automatic insertion of end-of-sentence tokens for 
sentence probability computation.
End-of-sentence is thus excluded from the total probability.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ngram-count(1), ngram-class(1), lm-scripts(1), ppl-scripts(1),
pfsg-scripts(1), nbest-scripts(1),
ngram-format(5), nbest-format(5), classes-format(5).
.br
J. A. Bilmes and K. Kirchhoff, ``Factored Language Models and Generalized
Parallel Backoff,'' \fIProc. HLT-NAACL\fP, pp. 4\-6, Edmonton, Alberta, 2003.
.br
C. Chelba,  T. Brants, W. Neveitt, and P. Xu,
``Study on Interaction Between Entropy Pruning and Kneser-Ney Smoothing,''
\fIProc. Interspeech\fP, pp. 2422-2425, Makuhari, Japan, 2010.
.br
S. F. Chen and J. Goodman, ``An Empirical Study of Smoothing Techniques for
Language Modeling,'' TR-10-98, Computer Science Group, Harvard Univ., 1998.
.br
J. Gao, P. Nguyen, X. Li, C. Thrasher, M. Li, and K. Wang,
``A Comparative Study of Bing Web N-gram Language Models for Web Search
and Natural Language Processing,'' Proc. SIGIR, July 2010.
.br 
K. Kirchhoff et al., ``Novel Speech Recognition Models for Arabic,''
Johns Hopkins University Summer Research Workshop 2002, Final Report.
.br
R. Kneser, J. Peters and D. Klakow,
``Language Model Adaptation Using Dynamic Marginals'',
\fIProc. Eurospeech\fP, pp. 1971\-1974, Rhodes, 1997.
.br
A. Stolcke and E. Shriberg, ``Statistical language modeling for speech
disfluencies,'' Proc. IEEE ICASSP, pp. 405\-409, Atlanta, GA, 1996.
.br
A. Stolcke,`` Entropy-based Pruning of Backoff Language Models,''
\fIProc. DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and Understanding Workshop\fP,
pp. 270\-274, Lansdowne, VA, 1998.
.br
A. Stolcke et al., ``Automatic Detection of Sentence Boundaries and
Disfluencies based on Recognized Words,'' \fIProc. ICSLP\fP, pp. 2247\-2250,
Sydney, 1998.
.br
M. Weintraub et al., ``Fast Training and Portability,''
in Research Note No. 1, Center for Language and Speech Processing,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Feb. 1996.
.br
J. Wu (2002), ``Maximum Entropy Language Modeling with Non-Local Dependencies,''
doctoral dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, 2002.
.SH BUGS
Some LM types (such as Bayes-interpolated and factored LMs) currently do
not support the 
.B \-write-lm 
function.
.PP
For the 
.B \-limit-vocab
option to work correctly with hidden event and class N-gram LMs, the
event/class vocabularies have to be specified by options (\c
.B \-hidden-vocab 
and
.BR \-classes ,
respectively).
Embedding event/class definitions in the LM file only will not work correctly.
.PP
Sentence generation is slow and takes time proportional to the vocabulary
size.
.PP
The file given by 
.B \-classes 
is read multiple times if
.B \-limit-vocab
is in effect or if a mixture of LMs is specified.
This will lead to incorrect behavior if the argument of
.B \-classes 
is stdin (``-'').
.PP
Also, 
.B \-limit-vocab 
will not work correctly with LM operations that require the entire
vocabulary to be enumerated, such as 
.B \-adapt-marginals 
or perplexity computation with
.BR "\-debug 3" .
.PP
The
.B \-multiword
option implicitly adds all word strings to the vocabulary.
Therefore, no OOVs are reported, only zero probability words.
.PP
Operations that require enumeration of the entire LM vocabulary will
not currently work with 
.BR \-use-server , 
since the client side only has knowledge of words it has already processed.
This affects the 
.B \-gen
and 
.B \-adapt-marginals 
options, as well as
.B \-ppl 
with
.BR "\-debug 3" .
A workaround is to specify the complete vocabulary with 
.B \-vocab
on the client side.
.PP
The reading of quantized LM parameters with the
.B \-codebook
option is currently only supported for N-gram LMs in
.BR ngram-format (5).
.SH AUTHORS
Andreas Stolcke <andreas.stolcke@microsoft.com>
.br
Jing Zheng <zj@speech.sri.com>
.br
Tanel Alumae <tanel.alumae@phon.ioc.ee>
.br
Copyright (c) 1995\-2012 SRI International
.br
Copyright (c) 2009\-2013 Tanel Alumae
.br
Copyright (c) 2012\-2015 Microsoft Corp.
