.\" $Id: ngram-count.1,v 1.48 2016/06/02 23:43:28 stolcke Exp $
.TH ngram-count 1 "$Date: 2016/06/02 23:43:28 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
ngram-count \- count N-grams and estimate language models
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBngram-count\fP [ \fB\-help\fP ] \fIoption\fP ...
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ngram-count
generates and manipulates N-gram counts, and estimates N-gram language
models from them.
The program first builds an internal N-gram count set, either
by reading counts from a file, or by scanning text input.
Following that, the resulting counts can be output back to a file
or used for building an N-gram language model in ARPA
.BR ngram-format (5).
Each of these actions is triggered by corresponding options, as
described below.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
Each filename argument can be an ASCII file, or a 
compressed file (name ending in .Z or .gz), or ``-'' to indicate
stdin/stdout.
.TP
.B \-help
Print option summary.
.TP
.B \-version
Print version information.
.TP
.BI \-order " n"
Set the maximal order (length) of N-grams to count.
This also determines the order of the estimated LM, if any.
The default order is 3.
.TP
.BI \-vocab " file"
Read a vocabulary from file.
Subsequently, out-of-vocabulary words in both counts or text are
replaced with the unknown-word token.
If this option is not specified all words found are implicitly added
to the vocabulary.
.TP
.BI \-vocab-aliases " file"
Reads vocabulary alias definitions from
.IR file ,
consisting of lines of the form
.nf
	\fIalias\fP \fIword\fP
.fi
This causes all tokens
.I alias
to be mapped to
.IR word .
.TP
.BI \-write-vocab " file"
Write the vocabulary built in the counting process to
.IR file .
.TP
.BI \-write-vocab-index " file"
Write the internal word-to-integer mapping to 
.IR file .
.TP
.B \-tagged
Interpret text and N-grams as consisting of word/tag pairs.
.TP
.B \-tolower
Map all vocabulary to lowercase.
.TP
.B \-memuse
Print memory usage statistics.
.SS Counting Options
.TP
.BI \-text " textfile"
Generate N-gram counts from text file.
.I textfile
should contain one sentence unit per line.
Begin/end sentence tokens are added if not already present.
Empty lines are ignored.
.TP
.B \-text-has-weights
Treat the first field in each text input line as a weight factor by
which the N-gram counts for that line are to be multiplied.
.TP
.B \-no-sos
Disable the automatic insertion of start-of-sentence tokens 
in N-gram counting.
.TP
.B \-no-eos
Disable the automatic insertion of end-of-sentence tokens
in N-gram counting.
.TP
.BI \-read " countsfile"
Read N-gram counts from a file.
Ascii count files contain one N-gram of 
words per line, followed by an integer count, all separated by whitespace.
Repeated counts for the same N-gram are added.
Thus several count files can be merged by using 
.BR cat (1)
and feeding the result to 
.BR "ngram-count \-read \-" 
(but see
.BR ngram-merge (1)
for merging counts that exceed available memory).
Counts collected by 
.B \-text
and 
.B \-read
are additive as well.
Binary count files (see below) are also recognized.
.TP
.BI \-read-google " dir"
Read N-grams counts from an indexed directory structure rooted in
.BR dir ,
in a format developed by
Google to store very large N-gram collections.
The corresponding directory structure can be created using the script
.B make-google-ngrams
described in
.BR training-scripts (1).
.TP
.BI \-intersect " file"
Limit reading of counts via
.B \-read 
and
.B \-read-google
to a subset of N-grams defined by another count 
.IR file .
(The counts in 
.I file
are ignored, only the N-grams are relevant.)
.TP
.BI \-write " file"
Write total counts to
.IR file .
.TP
.BI \-write-binary " file"
Write total counts to 
.I file 
in binary format.
Binary count files cannot be compressed and are typically
larger than compressed ascii count files.
However, they can be loaded faster, especially when the
.B \-limit-vocab 
option is used.
.TP
.BI \-write-order " n"
Order of counts to write.
The default is 0, which stands for N-grams of all lengths.
.TP
.BI -write "n file"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Writes only counts of the indicated order to
.IR file .
This is convenient to generate counts of different orders 
separately in a single pass.
.TP
.B \-sort
Output counts in lexicographic order, as required for
.BR ngram-merge (1).
.TP
.B \-recompute
Regenerate lower-order counts by summing the highest-order counts for 
each N-gram prefix.
.TP
.B \-limit-vocab
Discard N-gram counts on reading that do not pertain to the words 
specified in the vocabulary.
The default is that words used in the count files are automatically added to
the vocabulary.
.SS LM Options
.TP
.BI \-lm " lmfile"
Estimate a language model from the total counts and write it to
.IR lmfile .
This option applies to several LM model types (see below) but the default is to
estimate a backoff N-gram model, and write it in
.BR ngram-format (5).
.TP
.B \-write-binary-lm
Output 
.I lmfile
in binary format.
If an LM class does not provide a binary format the default (text) format
will be output instead.
.TP
.BI \-nonevents " file"
Read a list of words from
.I file
that are to be considered non-events, i.e., that
can only occur in the context of an N-gram.
Such words are given zero probability mass in model estimation.
.TP
.B \-float-counts
Enable manipulation of fractional counts.
Only certain discounting methods support non-integer counts.
.TP
.B \-skip
Estimate a ``skip'' N-gram model, which predicts a word by
an interpolation of the immediate context and the context one word prior.
This also triggers N-gram counts to be generated that are one word longer 
than the indicated order.
The following four options control the EM estimation algorithm used for
skip-N-grams.
.TP
.BI \-init-lm " lmfile"
Load an LM to initialize the parameters of the skip-N-gram.
.TP
.BI \-skip-init " value"
The initial skip probability for all words.
.TP
.BI \-em-iters " n"
The maximum number of EM iterations.
.TP
.BI \-em-delta " d"
The convergence criterion for EM: if the relative change in log likelihood
falls below the given value, iteration stops.
.TP
.B \-count-lm
Estimate a count-based interpolated LM using Jelinek-Mercer smoothing
(Chen & Goodman, 1998).
Several of the options for skip-N-gram LMs (above) apply.
An initial count-LM in the format described in 
.BR ngram (1)
needs to be specified using
.BR \-init-lm .
The options
.B \-em-iters
and
.B \-em-delta
control termination of the EM algorithm.
Note that the N-gram counts used to estimate the maximum-likelihood
estimates come from the 
.B \-init-lm
model.
The counts specified with
.B \-read
or
.B \-text
are used only to estimate the smoothing (interpolation weights).
.TP
.B \-maxent
Estimate a maximum entropy N-gram model.
The model is written to the file specifed by the
.B \-lm 
option.
.br
If 
.BI \-init-lm " file"
is also specified then use an existing maxent model from
.I file
as prior and adapt it using the given data.
.TP
.BI \-maxent-alpha " A"
Use the L1 regularization constant
.I A
for maxent estimation.
The default value is 0.5.
.TP
.BI \-maxent-sigma2 " S"
Use the L2 regularization constant
.I S
for maxent estimation.
The default value is 6 for estimation and 0.5 for adaptation.
.TP
.B \-maxent-convert-to-arpa
Convert the maxent model to
.BR ngram-format (5)
before writing it out, using the algorithm by Wu (2002).
.TP
.B \-unk
Build an ``open vocabulary'' LM, i.e., one that contains the unknown-word
token as a regular word.
The default is to remove the unknown word.
.TP
.BI \-map-unk " word"
Map out-of-vocabulary words to 
.IR word ,
rather than the default
.B <unk>
tag.
.TP
.B \-trust-totals
Force the lower-order counts to be used as total counts in estimating
N-gram probabilities.
Usually these totals are recomputed from the higher-order counts.
.TP
.BI \-prune " threshold"
Prune N-gram probabilities if their removal causes (training set)
perplexity of the model to increase by less than
.I threshold
relative.
.TP
.BI \-minprune " n"
Only prune N-grams of length at least
.IR n .
The default (and minimum allowed value) is 2, i.e., only unigrams are excluded
from pruning.
.TP
.BI \-debug " level"
Set debugging output from estimated LM at
.IR level .
Level 0 means no debugging.
Debugging messages are written to stderr.
.TP
.BI \-gt\fIn\fPmin " count"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Set the minimal count of N-grams of order
.I n
that will be included in the LM.
All N-grams with frequency lower than that will effectively be discounted to 0.
If 
.I n 
is omitted the parameter for N-grams of order > 9 is set.
.br
NOTE: This option affects not only the default Good-Turing discounting
but the alternative discounting methods described below as well.
.TP
.BI \-gt\fIn\fPmax " count"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Set the maximal count of N-grams of order
.I n
that are discounted under Good-Turing.
All N-grams more frequent than that will receive
maximum likelihood estimates.
Discounting can be effectively disabled by setting this to 0.
If 
.I n 
is omitted the parameter for N-grams of order > 9 is set.
.PP
In the following discounting parameter options, the order
.I n
may be omitted, in which case a default for all N-gram orders is
set.
The corresponding discounting method then becomes the default method
for all orders, unless specifically overridden by an option with
.IR n .
If no discounting method is specified, Good-Turing is used.
.TP
.BI \-gt\fIn\fP " gtfile"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Save or retrieve Good-Turing parameters
(cutoffs and discounting factors) in/from
.IR gtfile .
This is useful as GT parameters should always be determined from
unlimited vocabulary counts, whereas the eventual LM may use a
limited vocabulary.
The parameter files may also be hand-edited.
If an
.B \-lm
option is specified the GT parameters are read from
.IR gtfile ,
otherwise they are computed from the current counts and saved in
.IR gtfile .
.TP
.BI \-cdiscount\fIn\fP " discount"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Use Ney's absolute discounting for N-grams of 
order
.IR n ,
using
.I discount
as the constant to subtract.
.TP
.B \-wbdiscount\fIn\fP
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Use Witten-Bell discounting for N-grams of order
.IR n .
(This is the estimator where the first occurrence of each word is
taken to be a sample for the ``unseen'' event.)
.TP
.B \-ndiscount\fIn\fP
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Use Ristad's natural discounting law for N-grams of order
.IR n .
.TP
.BI \-addsmooth\fIn\fP " delta"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Smooth by adding 
.I delta
to each N-gram count.
This is usually a poor smoothing method and included mainly for instructional
purposes.
.TP
.B \-kndiscount\fIn\fP
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Use Chen and Goodman's modified Kneser-Ney discounting for N-grams of order
.IR n .
.TP
.B \-kn-counts-modified
Indicates that input counts have already been modified for Kneser-Ney 
smoothing.
If this option is not given, the KN discounting method modifies counts
(except those of highest order) in order to estimate the backoff distributions.
When using the 
.B \-write
and related options the output will reflect the modified counts.
.TP
.B \-kn-modify-counts-at-end
Modify Kneser-Ney counts after estimating discounting constants, rather than
before as is the default.
.TP
.BI \-kn\fIn\fP " knfile"
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Save or retrieve Kneser-Ney parameters
(cutoff and discounting constants) in/from
.IR knfile .
This is useful as smoothing parameters should always be determined from
unlimited vocabulary counts, whereas the eventual LM may use a
limited vocabulary.
The parameter files may also be hand-edited.
If an
.B \-lm
option is specified the KN parameters are read from
.IR knfile ,
otherwise they are computed from the current counts and saved in
.IR knfile .
.TP
.B \-ukndiscount\fIn\fP
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Use the original (unmodified) Kneser-Ney discounting method for N-grams of
order
.IR n .
.TP
.B \-interpolate\fIn\fP
where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
Causes the discounted N-gram probability estimates at the specified order 
.I n
to be interpolated with lower-order estimates.
(The result of the interpolation is encoded as a standard backoff
model and can be evaluated as such -- the interpolation happens at
estimation time.)
This sometimes yields better models with some smoothing methods
(see Chen & Goodman, 1998).
Only Witten-Bell, absolute discounting, and
(original or modified) Kneser-Ney smoothing
currently support interpolation.
.TP
.BI \-meta-tag " string"
Interpret words starting with 
.I string
as count-of-count (meta-count) tags.
For example, an N-gram
.nf
	a b \fIstring\fP3	4
.fi
means that there were 4 trigrams starting with "a b"
that occurred 3 times each.
Meta-tags are only allowed in the last position of an N-gram.
.br
Note: when using 
.B \-tolower
the meta-tag
.I string 
must not contain any uppercase characters.
.TP
.B \-read-with-mincounts
Save memory by eliminating N-grams with counts that fall below the thresholds
set by
.BI \-gt N min
options during 
.B \-read 
operation 
(this assumes the input counts contain no duplicate N-grams).
Also, if
.B \-meta-tag 
is defined,
these low-count N-grams will be converted to count-of-count N-grams,
so that smoothing methods that need this information still work correctly.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ngram-merge(1), ngram(1), ngram-class(1), training-scripts(1), lm-scripts(1),
ngram-format(5).
.br
T. Alumäe and M. Kurimo, ``Efficient Estimation of Maximum Entropy
Language Models with N-gram features: an SRILM extension,''
\fIProc. Interspeech\fP, 1820\-1823, 2010.
.br
S. F. Chen and J. Goodman, ``An Empirical Study of Smoothing Techniques for
Language Modeling,'' TR-10-98, Computer Science Group, Harvard Univ., 1998.
.br
S. M. Katz, ``Estimation of Probabilities from Sparse Data for the
Language Model Component of a Speech Recognizer,'' \fIIEEE Trans. ASSP\fP 35(3),
400\-401, 1987.
.br
R. Kneser and H. Ney, ``Improved backing-off for M-gram language modeling,''
\fIProc. ICASSP\fP, 181-184, 1995.
.br
H. Ney and U. Essen, ``On Smoothing Techniques for Bigram-based Natural
Language Modelling,'' \fIProc. ICASSP\fP, 825\-828, 1991.
.br
E. S. Ristad, ``A Natural Law of Succession,'' CS-TR-495-95,
Comp. Sci. Dept., Princeton Univ., 1995.
.br
I. H. Witten and T. C. Bell, ``The Zero-Frequency Problem: Estimating the
Probabilities of Novel Events in Adaptive Text Compression,''
\fIIEEE Trans. Information Theory\fP 37(4), 1085\-1094, 1991.
.br
J. Wu (2002), ``Maximum Entropy Language Modeling with Non-Local Dependencies,''
doctoral dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, 2002.
.SH BUGS
Several of the LM types supported by 
.BR ngram (1)
don't have explicit support in
.BR ngram-count .
Instead, they are built by separately manipulating N-gram counts, 
followed by standard N-gram model estimation.
.br
LM support for tagged words is incomplete.
.br
Only absolute and Witten-Bell discounting currently support fractional counts.
.br
The combination of 
.B \-read-with-mincounts
and 
.B \-meta-tag 
preserves enough count-of-count information for
.I applying 
discounting parameters to the input counts, but it does not 
necessarily allow the parameters to be correctly 
.IR estimated .
Therefore, discounting parameters should always be estimated from full 
counts (e.g., using the helper 
.BR training-scripts (1)),
and then read from files.
.br
Smoothing with 
.B \-kndiscount 
or 
.B \-ukndiscount
has a side-effect on the N-gram counts, since
the lower-order counts are destructively modified according to the KN smoothing approach
(Kneser & Ney, 1995).
The
.BR \-write
option will output these modified counts, and count cutoffs specified by
.BI \-gt N min
operate on the modified counts, potentially leading to a different set of N-grams
being retained than with other discounting methods.
This can be considered either a feature or a bug.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <andreas.stolcke@microsoft.com>
.br
Tanel Alumäe <tanel.alumae@phon.ioc.ee>
.br
Copyright (c) 1995\-2011 SRI International
.br
Copyright (c) 2009\-2013 Tanel Alumäe
.br
Copyright (c) 2012\-2013 Microsoft Corp.
