.\" $Id: pfsg-scripts.1,v 1.24 2009/09/08 18:21:54 stolcke Exp $
.TH pfsg-scripts 1 "$Date: 2009/09/08 18:21:54 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsg-scripts, add-classes-to-pfsg, add-pauses-to-pfsg, classes-to-fsm, fsm-to-pfsg, htklat-vocab, make-nbest-pfsg, make-ngram-pfsg, pfsg-from-ngram, pfsg-to-dot, pfsg-to-fsm, pfsg-vocab, wlat-stats, wlat-to-dot, wlat-to-pfsg \- create and manipulate finite-state networks
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBmake-ngram-pfsg\fP [ \fBmaxorder=\fP\fIN\fP ] [ \fBcheck_bows=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBno_empty_bo=1\fP ] \\
	[ \fBversion=1\fP ] [ \fBtop_level_name=\fP\fIname\fP ] [ \fBnull=\fP\fIstring\fP ] \\
	[ \fIlm-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIpfsg-file\fP
\fBadd-pauses-to-pfsg\fP [ \fBvocab=\fP\fIfile\fP ] [ \fBpauselast=1\fP ] [ \fBwordwrap=0\fP ] \\
	[ \fBpause=\fP\fIpauseword\fP ] [ \fBversion=1\fP ] [ \fBtop_level_name=\fP\fIname\fP ] \\
	[ \fBnull=\fP\fIstring\fP ] [ \fIpfsg-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fInew-pfsg-file\fP
\fBadd-classes-to-pfsg\fP \fBclasses=\fP\fIclasses\fP [ \fBnull=\fP\fIstring\fP ] \\
	[ \fIpfsg-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fInew-pfsg-file\fP
\fBpfsg-from-ngram\fP [ \fIlm-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIpfsg-file\fP
\fBmake-nbest-pfsg\fP [ \fBnotree=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBscale=\fP\fIS\fP ] [ \fBamw=\fP\fIA\fP ] [ \fBlmw=\fP\fIL\fP ] \\
	[ \fBwtw=\fP\fIW\fP ] [ \fInbest-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIpfsg-file\fP
\fBpfsg-vocab\fP [ \fIpfsg-file\fP ... ]
\fBhtklat-vocab\fP [ \fBquotes=1\fP ] [ \fIhtk-lattice-file\fP ... ]
\fBpfsg-to-dot\fP [ \fBshow_probs=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [\fBshow_logs=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBshow_nums=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] \\
	[ \fIpfsg-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIdot-file\fP
\fBpfsg-to-fsm\fP [ \fBsymbolfile=\fP\fIsymbols\fP ] [ \fBsymbolic=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] \\
	[ \fBscale=\fP\fIS\fP ] [ \fBfinal_output=\fP\fIE\fP ] [ \fIpfsg-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIfsm-file\fP
\fBfsm-to-pfsg\fP [ \fBpfsg_name=\fP\fIname\fP ] [ \fBtransducer=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBscale=\fP\fIS\fP ] \\
	[ \fBmap_epsilon=\fP\fIE\fP ] [ \fIfsm-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIpfsg-file\fP
\fBclasses-to-fsm\fP \fBvocab=\fP\fIvocab\fP [ \fBsymbolic=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBisymbolfile=\fP\fIisymbols\fP ] \\
	[ \fBosymbolfile=\fP\fIosymbols\fP ] [ \fIclasses\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIfsm-file\fP
\fBwlat-to-pfsg\fP [ \fIwlat-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIpfsg-file\fP
\fBwlat-to-dot\fP [ \fBshow_probs=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBshow_nums=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] \\
	[ \fIwlat-file\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIdot-file\fP
\fBwlat-stats\fP [ \fIwlat-file\fP ]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These scripts create and manipulate various forms of finite-state networks.
Note that they take options with the 
.BR gawk (1)
syntax
.IB option = value
instead of the more common
.BI - option
.IR value .
.PP
Also, since these tools are implemented as scripts they don't automatically
input or output compressed model files correctly, unlike the main
SRILM tools.
However, since most scripts work with data from standard input or
to standard output (by leaving out the file argument, or specifying it 
as ``-'') it is easy to combine them with 
.BR gunzip (1)
or
.BR gzip (1)
on the command line.
.PP
.B make-ngram-pfsg
encodes a backoff N-gram model in
.BR ngram-format (5)
as a finite-state network in
.BR pfsg-format (5).
.BI maxorder= N
limits the N-gram length used in PFSG construction to 
.IR N ;
the default is to use all N-grams occurring in the input model.
.B check_bows=1
enables a check for conditional probabilities that are smaller than the
corresponding backoff probabilities.
Such transitions should first be removed from the model with 
.BR "ngram \-prune-lowprobs" .
.B no_empty_bo=1
Prevents empty paths through the PFSG resulting from transitions 
through the unigram backoff node.
.PP
.B add-pauses-to-pfsg
replaces the word nodes in an input PFSG with sub-PFSGs that 
allow an optional pause before each word.
It also inserts an optional pause following the last word in the sentence.
A typical usage is 
.nf
	make-ngram-pfsg \fIngram\fP | \\
	add-pauses-to-pfsg >\fIfinal-pfsg\fP
.fi
The result is a PFSG suitable for use in a speech recognizer.
The option
.B pauselast=1
switches the order of words and pause nodes in the sub-PFSGs;
.B wordwrap=0
disables the insertion of sub-PFSGs altogether.
.PP
The options
.BI pause= pauseword 
and 
.BI top_level_name= name
allow changing the default names of the pause word and the top-level
grammar, respectively.
.B version=1
inserts a version line at the top of the output as required by 
the Nuance recognition system (see NUANCE COMPATIBILTY below).
.B add-pauses-to-pfsg
uses a heuristic to distinguish word nodes in the input PFSG from
other nodes (NULL or sub-PFSGs).
The option
.BI vocab= file
lets one specify a vocabulary of word names to override these heuristics.
.PP
.B add-classes-to-pfsg
extends an input PFSG with expansions for word classes, defined in
.IR classes .
.IR pfsg-file
should contain a PFSG generated from the N-gram portion of a class N-gram
model.
A typical usage is thus
.nf
	make-ngram-pfsg \fIclass-ngram\fP | \\
	add-classes-to-pfsg classes=\fIclasses\fP | \\
	add-pauses-to-pfsg >\fIfinal-pfsg\fP
.fi
.PP
.B pfsg-from-ngram
is a wrapper script that combines removal of low-probability N-grams,
conversion to PFSG, and adding of optional pauses to create a PFSG
for recognition.
.PP
.B make-nbest-pfsg
converts an N-best list in 
.BR nbest-format (5)
into a PFSG which, when used in recognition,
allows exactly the hypotheses contained in the N-best list.
.B notree=1
creates separate PFSG nodes for all word instances; the default is to
construct a prefix-tree structured PFSG.
.BI scale= S
multiplies the total hypothesis scores by 
.IR S ;
the default is 0, meaning that all hypotheses have identical probability
in the PFSG.
Three options,
.BR amw=\fIA\fP ,
.BR lmw=\fIL\fP ,
and
.BR wtw=\fIW\fP ,
control the score weighting in N-best lists that contain
separate acoustic and language model scores, setting the 
acoustic model weight to
.IR A,
the language model weight to
.IR L ,
and the word transition weight to
.IR W .
.PP
.B pfsg-vocab
extracts the vocabulary used in one or more PFSGs.
.B htklat-vocab
does the same for lattices in HTK standard lattice format.
The
.B quotes=1
option enables processing of HTK quotes.
.PP
.B pfsg-to-dot
renders a PFSG in
.BR dot (1)
format for subsequent layout, printing, etc.
.B show_probs=1
includes transition probabilities in the output.
.B show_logs=1
includes log (base 10) transition probabilities in the output.
.B show_nums=1
includes node numbers in the output.
.PP
.B pfsg-to-fsm
converts a finite-state network in 
.BR pfsg-format (5)
into an equivalent network in AT&T
.BR fsm (5)
format.
This involves moving output actions from nodes to transitions.
If 
.BI symbolfile= symbols
is specified, the mapping from FSM output symbols is written to
.IR symbols 
for later use with the
.B \-i
or 
.B \-o
options of 
.BR fsm (1)
tools.
.B symbolic=1
preserves the word strings in the resulting FSA.
.BI scale= S
scales the transition weights by a factor
.IR S ;
the default is -1 (to conform to the default FSM semiring).
.BI final_output= E
forces the final FSA node to have output label
.IR S ;
this also forces creation of a unique final FSA node, which is
otherwise unnecessary if the final node has a null output.
.PP
.B fsm-to-pfsg
conversely transforms 
.BR fsm (5)
format into
.BR pfsg-format (5).
This involves moving output actions from transitions to nodes, and
generally requires an increase in the number of nodes.
(The conversion is done such that
.B pfsg-to-fsm
and
.B fsm-to-pfsg
are exact inverses of each other.)
The
.I name
parameter sets the name field of the output PFSG.
.B transducer=1
indicates that the input is a transducer and that input:output pairs should
be preserved in the PFSG.
.BI scale= S
scales the transition weights by a factor
.IR S ;
the default is -1 (to conform to the default FSM semiring).
.BI map_epsilon= E
specifies a string 
.I E
that FSM epsilon symbols are to be mapped to.
.PP
.B classes-to-fsm
converts a
.BR classes-format (5)
file into a transducer in
.BR fsm (5)
format, such that composing the transducer with
an FSA encoding a class language model results in an FSA for the
word language model.
The word vocabulary needs to be given in file
.IR vocab .
.BI isymbolfile= isymbols
and
.BI osymbolfile= osymbols
allow saving the input and output symbol tables of the transducer for
later use.
.B symbolic=1
preserves the word strings in the resulting FSA.
.PP
The following commands show the creation of an FSA encoding the class N-gram
grammar ``test.bo'' with vocabulary ``test.vocab'' and class expansions
``test.classes'':
.nf
	classes-to-fsm vocab=test.vocab symbolic=1 \\
        	isymbolfile=CLASSES.inputs \\
		osymbolfile=CLASSES.outputs \\
		test.classes >CLASSES.fsm

	make-ngram-pfsg test.bo | \\
	pfsg-to-fsm symbolic=1 >test.fsm
	fsmcompile -i CLASSES.inputs test.fsm  >test.fsmc

	fsmcompile -t -i CLASSES.inputs -o CLASSES.outputs \\
		CLASSES.fsm >CLASSES.fsmc
	fsmcompose test.fsmc CLASSES.fsmc >result.fsmc
.fi
.PP
.B wlat-to-pfsg
converts a word posterior lattice or mesh ("sausage") in 
.BR wlat-format (5)
into 
.BR pfsg-format (5).
.PP
.B wlat-to-dot
renders a
.BR wlat-format (5)
word lattice in 
.BR dot (1)
format for subsequent layout, printing, etc.
.B show_probs=1
includes node posterior probabilities in the output.
.B show_nums=1
includes node indices in the output.
.PP
.B wlat-stats
computes statistics of word posterior lattices, including the number of 
word hypotheses, the entropy (log base 10) of the sentence hypothesis
set represented, and the posterior expected number of words.
For word meshes that have been aligned with references, the 1-best and 
oracle lattice error rates are also computed.
.SH "NUANCE COMPATIBILITY"
.PP
The Nuance recognizer (as of version 6.2) understands a variant of the 
PFSG format; hence the scripts above should be useful in building
recognition systems for that recognizer.
.PP
A suitable PFSG can be generated from an N-gram backoff model
in ARPA
.BR ngram-format (5)
using the following command:
.nf
	ngram -debug 1 -order \fIN\fP -lm \fILM.bo\fP -prune-lowprobs -write-lm - | \\
	make-ngram-pfsg | \\
	add-pauses-to-pfsg version=1 pauselast=1 pause=_pau_ top_level_name=.TOP_LEVEL >\fILM.pfsg\fP
.fi
assuming the pause word in the dictionary is ``_pau_''.
Certain restrictions on the naming of words (e.g., no hyphens are allowed)
have to be respected.
.PP
The resulting PFSG can then be referenced in a Nuance grammar file, e.g.,
.nf
	.TOP [NGRAM_PFSG]
	NGRAM_PFSG:lm \fILM.pfsg\fP
.fi
.PP
In newer Nuance versions the name for a non-emitting node was changed to
.BR NULNOD ,
and inter-word optional pauses are automatically added to the grammar.
This means that the PFSG should be create using
.nf
	ngram -debug 1 -order \fIN\fP -lm \fILM.bo\fP -prune-lowprobs -write-lm - | \\
	make-ngram-pfsg version=1 top_level_name=.TOP_LEVEL null=NULNOD >\fILM.pfsg\fP
.fi
The 
.B null=NULNOD 
option should also be passed to
.BR add-classes-to-pfsg .
.PP
Starting with version 8, Nuance supports N-gram LMs.
However, you can still use SRILM to create LMs, as described above.
The syntax for inclusion of a PFSG has changed to
.nf
	NGRAM_PFSG:slm \fILM.pfsg\fP
.fi
.PP
Caveat: Compatibility with Nuance is purely due to historical circumstance and
not supported.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lattice-tool(1), ngram(1), ngram-format(5), pfsg-format(5), wlat-format(5),
nbest-format(5), classes-format(5), fsm(5), dot(1).
.SH BUGS
.B make-ngram-pfsg
should be reimplemented in C++ for speed and some size optimizations that
require more global operations on the PFSG.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>.
.br
Copyright 1995-2005 SRI International
