.\" $Id: segment-nbest.1,v 1.9 2007/12/20 19:13:52 stolcke Exp $
.TH segment-nbest 1 "$Date: 2007/12/20 19:13:52 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
segment-nbest \- rescore and segment N-best lists using hidden segment N-gram model
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fsegment-nbest\fP [ \fB\-help\fP ] \fIoption\fP ... \fInbest-file-list\fP ...
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B segment-nbest
processes a series of consecutive N-best lists from a speech
recognizer
and applies a hidden segment N-gram language model to them.
The language model is a standard backoff N-gram model in ARPA
.BR ngram-format (5)
modeling sentence segmentation using the boundary tags <s> and </s>.
The program reads in all N-best lists and outputs the 
hypotheses that have the highest aggregate (combined acoustic 
and language model) score.
Hypothesized sentence boundaries are marked by <s> tags.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
Each filename argument can be an ASCII file, or a 
compressed file (name ending in .Z or .gz), or ``-'' to indicate
stdin/stdout.
.TP
.B \-help
Print option summary.
.TP
.B \-version
Print version information.
.TP
.BI \-order " n"
Set the maximal N-gram order to be used, by default 3.
NOTE: The order of the model is not set automatically when a model
file is read, so the same file can be used at various orders.
.TP
.BI \-debug " level"
Set the debugging output level (0 means no debugging output).
Debugging messages are sent to stderr.
.TP
.BI \-lm " file"
Read the N-gram model from
.IR file .
.TP
.B \-tolower
Map all vocabulary to lowercase.
Useful if case conventions for N-best lists and language model differ.
.TP
.BI \-mix-lm " file"
Read a second, standard N-gram model for interpolation purposes.
.TP
.BI \-lambda " weight"
Set the weight of the main model when interpolating with
.BR \-mix-lm .
Default value is 0.5.
.TP
.BI \-bayes " length"
Interpolate the second and the main model using posterior probabilities
for local N-gram-contexts of length
.IR length .
The 
.B \-lambda 
value is used as a prior mixture weight in this case.
.TP
.BI \-bayes-scale " scale"
Set the exponential scale factor on the context likelihood in conjunction
with the
.B \-bayes
function.
Default value is 1.0.
.TP
.BI \-nbest-files " list"
Specifies a list of N-best files.
The file
.I list
should contain a list of filenames, one per line,
each corresponding to an N-best file in one of the formats
described in 
.BR nbest-format (5).
The N-best files should correspond to consecutive speech waveforms
in the order listed.
.TP
.B \-fb-rescore
Perform Forward-backward rescoring.
This generates new N-best lists
as output whose LM scores reflect the posterior probability of each
hypothesis.
The default is to perform Viterbi rescoring and output only the
best combined hypothesis.
.TP
.BI \-write-nbest-dir " dir"
Write rescored N-best lists to directory 
.I dir
instead of to stdout.
The filenames from the input are preserved.
.TP
.BI \-max-nbest " n"
Limits the number of hypotheses read from each N-best list to the first
.IR n .
.TP
.BI \-max-rescore " m"
Only choose among the top 
.I m
hypotheses of each list (after reordering hypotheses, see below).
This is an effective way to limit the quadratic computation 
of the Viterbi or forward/backward dynamic programming.
.TP
.B \-no-reorder
Do not reorder the hypotheses before limiting the computation to
the top
.IR m .
By default the hypotheses will first be sorted according to the 
acoustic and language model scores recorded in the N-best lists.
.TP
.BI \-rescore-lmw " weight"
Specifies the language model weight to be use in combining
acoustic and language model scores to select the best hypotheses.
.TP
.BI \-rescore-wtw " weight"
Specifies the word transition weight to be used in selecting the
best hypotheses.
.TP
.BI \-noise " noise-tag"
Designate
.I noise-tag
as a vocabulary item that is to be ignored by the LM.
(This is typically used to identify a noise marker.)
.TP
.BI \-noise-vocab " file"
Read several noise tags from
.IR file ,
instead of, or in addition to, the single noise tag specified by
.BR \-noise .
.TP
.BI \-decipher-lm " model-file"
Designates the N-gram backoff model (typically a bigram) that was used by the
Decipher(TM) recognizer in computing composite scores.
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores if the
N-best lists are in "NBestList1.0" format.
.TP
.BI \-decipher-lmw " weight"
Specifies the language model weight used by the recognizer.
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores.
.TP
.BI \-decipher-wtw " weight"
Specifies the word transition weight used by the recognizer.
Used to compute acoustic scores from the composite scores.
.TP
.BI \-stag " string"
Use
.I string
to mark segment boundaries in the output.
Default is the start-of-sentence symbol defined in the language model (<s>).
.TP
.BI \-bias " b"
Make a segment boundary a priori more likely by a factor of
.IR b .
If
.I b
is 0, the dynamic program algorithm is restricted to never consider
hidden sentence boundaries; this is useful when
.B segment-nbest 
is used merely for its ability to apply the LM across N-best boundaries.
.TP
.BI \-start-tag " string"
Insert a tag 
.I string
at the front of every N-best hypothesis read in.
.TP
.BI \-end-tag " string"
Insert a tag 
.I string
at the end of every N-best hypothesis read in.
This and the previous option are useful if the LM marks acoustic
waveform boundaries with a special tag.
.PP
.B segment-nbest
will also process any command line arguments following the options
as lists of N-best lists, as with the 
.B \-nbest-files
option.
Each 
.I nbest-file-list
will be processed in turn,
with individual output delimited by a line of the form
.nf
	<nbestfile \fInbest-file-list\fP>
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ngram-count(1), segment(1), ngram-format(5), nbest-format(5).
.br
A. Stolcke, ``Modeling Linguistic Segment and Turn Boundaries for N-best
Rescoring of Spontaneous Speech,'' \fIProc. Eurospeech\fP, 2779\-2782, 1997.
.SH BUGS
N-gram models of arbitrary order can be used, but the context at the 
beginning of a hypothesis never extends beyond the words from the preceding
N-best list.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>.
.br
Copyright 1997\-2004 SRI International
