.\" $Id: training-scripts.1,v 1.26 2013/12/11 08:43:38 stolcke Exp $
.TH training-scripts 1 "$Date: 2013/12/11 08:43:38 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
training-scripts, compute-oov-rate, continuous-ngram-count, get-gt-counts, make-abs-discount, make-batch-counts, make-big-lm, make-diacritic-map,  make-google-ngrams, make-gt-discounts, make-kn-counts, make-kn-discounts, merge-batch-counts, replace-unk-words, replace-words-with-classes, reverse-ngram-counts, split-tagged-ngrams, reverse-text, tolower-ngram-counts, uniform-classes, uniq-ngram-counts, vp2text \- miscellaneous conveniences for language model training
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBget-gt-counts\fP \fBmax=\fP\fIK\fP \fBout=\fP\fIname\fP [ \fIcounts\fP ... ] \fB>\fP \fIgtcounts\fP
\fBmake-abs-discount\fP \fIgtcounts\fP
\fBmake-gt-discounts\fP \fBmin=\fP\fImin\fP \fBmax=\fP\fImax\fP \fIgtcounts\fP
\fBmake-kn-counts\fP \fBorder=\fP\fIN\fP \fBmax_per_file=\fP\fIM\fP \fBoutput=\fP\fIfile\fP \\
	[ \fBno_max_order=1\fP ] \fB>\fP \fIcounts\fP
\fBmake-kn-discounts\fP \fBmin=\fP\fImin\fP \fIgtcounts\fP
\fBmake-batch-counts\fP \fIfile-list\fP \\
	[ \fIbatch-size\fP [ \fIfilter\fP [ \fIcount-dir\fP [ \fIoptions\fP ... ] ] ] ]
\fBmerge-batch-counts\fP [ \fB\-float-counts\fP ] [ \fB\-l\fP \fIN\fP ] \fIcount-dir\fP [ \fIfile-list\fP|\fIstart-iter\fP ]
\fBmake-google-ngrams\fP [ \fBdir=\fP\fIDIR\fP ] [ \fBper_file=\fP\fIN\fP ] [ \fBgzip=0\fP ] \\
	[ \fByahoo=1\fP ] [ \fIcounts-file\fP ... ]
\fBcontinuous-ngram-count\fP [ \fBorder=\fP\fIN\fP ] [ \fItextfile\fP ... ]
\fBtolower-ngram-counts\fP [ \fIcounts-file\fP ... ]
\fBuniq-ngram-counts\fP [ \fIcounts-file\fP ... ]
\fBreverse-ngram-counts\fP [ \fIcounts-file\fP ... ]
\fBreverse-text\fP [ \fItextfile\fP ... ]
\fBsplit-tagged-ngrams\fP [ \fBseparator=\fP\fIS\fP ] [ \fIcounts-file\fP ... ]
\fBmake-big-lm\fP \fB\-name\fP \fIname\fP \fB\-read\fP \fIcounts\fP \fB\-lm\fP \fInew-model\fP \\
	[ \fB\-trust-totals\fP ] [ \fB\-max-per-file\fP \fIM\fP ] [ \fB\-ngram-filter\fP \fIfilter\fP ] \\
	[ \fB\-text \fIfile\fP ] [ \fIngram-options\fP ... ]
\fBreplace-unk-words\fP \fBvocab=\fP\fIvocab\fP [ \fItextfile\fP ... ]
\fBreplace-words-with-classes\fP \fBclasses=\fP\fIclasses\fP [ \fBoutfile=\fP\fIcounts\fP ] \\
	[ \fBnormalize=0\fP|\fB1\fP ] [ \fBaddone=\fP\fIK\fP ] [ \fBhave_counts=1\fP ] [ \fBpartial=1\fP ] \\
	[ \fItextfile\fP ... ]
\fBuniform-classes\fP \fIclasses\fP \fB>\fP \fInew-classes\fP
\fBmake-diacritic-map\fP \fIvocab\fP
\fBvp2text\fP [ \fItextfile\fP ... ]
\fBcompute-oov-rate\fP \fIvocab\fP [ \fIcounts\fP ... ]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These scripts perform convenience tasks associated with the training of
language models.
They complement and extend the basic N-gram model estimator in
.BR ngram-count (1).
.PP
Since these tools are implemented as scripts they don't automatically
input or output compressed data files correctly, unlike the main
SRILM tools.
However, since most scripts work with data from standard input or
to standard output (by leaving out the file argument, or specifying it 
as ``-'') it is easy to combine them with 
.BR gunzip (1)
or
.BR gzip (1)
on the command line.
.PP
Also note that many of the scripts take their options with the 
.BR gawk (1)
syntax
.IB option = value
instead of the more common
.BI - option
.IR value .
.PP
.B get-gt-counts
computes the counts-of-counts statistics needed in Good-Turing smoothing.
The frequencies of counts up to
.I K 
are computed (default is 10).
The results are stored in a series of files with root
.IR name ,
.BR \fIname\fP.gt1counts ,
.BR \fIname\fP.gt2counts ,
\&..., 
.BR \fIname\fP.gt\fIN\fPcounts .
It is assumed that the input counts have been properly merged, i.e.,
that there are no duplicated N-grams.
.PP
.B make-gt-discounts
takes one of the output files of
.B get-gt-counts
and computes the corresponding Good-Turing discounting factors.
The output can then be passed to
.BR ngram-count (1)
via the 
.BI \-gt n
options to control the smoothing during model estimation.
Precomputing the GT discounting in this fashion has the advantage that the
GT statistics are not affected by restricting N-grams to a limited vocabulary.
Also, 
.BR get-gt-counts / make-gt-discounts
can process arbitrarily large count files, since they do not need to
read the counts into memory (unlike
.BR ngram-count ).
.PP
.B make-abs-discount
computes the absolute discounting constant needed for the
.B ngram-count
.BI \-cdiscount n
options.
Input is one of the files produced by 
.BR get-gt-counts . 
.PP
.B make-kn-discount
computes the discounting constants used by the modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing method.
Input is one of the files produced by 
.BR get-gt-counts . 
.PP
.B make-batch-counts
performs the first stage in the construction of very large N-gram count 
files.
.I file-list
is a list of input text files.
Lines starting with a `#' character are ignored.
These files will be grouped into batches of size
.I batch-size 
(default 10)
that are then processed in one run of
.B ngram-count 
each.
For maximum performance,
.I batch-size 
should be as large as possible without triggering paging.
Optionally, a
.I filter
script or program can be given to condition the input texts.
The N-gram count files are left in directory
.I count-dir
(``counts'' by default), where they can be found by a subsequent
run of
.BR merge-batch-counts .
All following
.I options
are passed to 
.BR ngram-count ,
e.g., to control N-gram order, vocabulary, etc.
(no options triggering model estimation should be included).
.PP
.B merge-batch-counts
completes the construction of large count files by merging the 
batched counts left in 
.I count-dir
until a single count file is produced.
Optionally, a
.I file-list 
of count files to combine can be specified; otherwise all count files
in
.I count-dir
from a prior run of
.B make-batch-counts
will be merged.
A number as second argument restarts the merging process at iteration
.IR start-iter .
This is convenient if merging fails to complete for some reason
(e.g., for temporary lack of disk space).
The 
.B \-float-counts
option should be specific if the counts are real-valued.
The
.B \-l
option specifies the number of files to merge in each iteration;
the default is 2.
.PP
.B make-google-ngrams
takes a sorted count file as input and creates an indexed directory
structure, in a format developed by Google to store very large N-gram
collections.
The resulting directory can then be used with the
.BR ngram-count (1)
.B \-read-google
option.
Optional arguments specify the output directory
.I dir
and the size
.I N
of individual N-gram files
(default is 10 million N-grams per file).
The 
.B gzip=0 
option writes plain, as opposed to compressed, files.
The 
.B yahoo=1
option may be used to read N-gram count files in Yahoo-GALE format.
Note that the count files have to first be sorted lexicographically
in a separate invocation of sort.
.PP
.B continuous-ngram-count
generates N-grams that span line breaks (which are usually taken to
be sentence boundaries).
To count N-grams across line breaks use
.nf
	continuous-ngram-count \fItextfile\fP | ngram-count -read -
.fi
The argument
.I N
controls the order of N-grams counted (default 3), and
should match  the argument of 
.B ngram-count
.BR \-order .
.PP
.B tolower-ngram-counts
maps an N-gram counts file to all-lowercase.
No merging of N-grams that become identical in the process is done.
.PP
.B uniq-ngram-counts
combines successive counts that pertain to the same N-gram into a single
line.
This only affects repeated N-grams that appear on successive lines, so a prior
sort command is typically used, e.g.,
.br
	tolower-ngram-counts \fIINPUT\fP | sort | uniq-ngram-counts > \fiOUTPUT\fP
.br
would do much of the same thing as
.br
	ngram-counts -read \fIINPUT\fP -tolower -sort -write \fIOUTPUT\fP
.br 
but in a more memory-efficient manner (without reading all counts into memory).
.PP
.B reverse-ngram-counts
reverses the word order of N-grams in a counts file or stream.
For example, to recompute lower-order counts from higher-order ones,
but do the summation over preceding words (rather than following words,
as in 
.BR ngram-count (1)),
use
.br
	reverse-ngram-counts \fIcount-file\fP | \\
.br
	ngram-count -read - -recompute -write - | \\
.br
	reverse-ngram-counts > \fInew-counts\fP
.PP
.B reverse-text
reverses the word order in text files, line-by-line.
Start- and end-sentence tags, if present, will be preserved.
This reversal is appropriate for preprocessing training data
for LMs that are meant to be used with the 
.B ngram
.BR \-reverse
option.
.PP
.B split-tagged-ngrams
expands N-gram count of word/tag pairs into mixed N-grams 
of words and tags.
The optional 
.BI separator= S
argument allows the delimiting character, which defaults to "/",
to be modified.
.PP
.B make-big-lm
constructs large N-gram models in a more memory-efficient way than
.B ngram-count
by itself.
It does so by precomputing the Good-Turing or Kneser-Ney smoothing parameters
from the full set of counts, and then instructing
.B ngram-count 
to store only a subset of the counts in memory,
namely those of N-grams to be retained in the model.
The
.I name
parameter is used to name various auxiliary files.
.I counts 
contains the raw N-gram counts; it may be (and usually is) a compressed file.
Unlike with
.BR ngram-count ,
the
.B \-read
option can be repeated to concatenate multiple count files, but the arguments
must be regular files; reading from stdin is not supported.
If Good-Turing smoothing is used and the file contains complete lower-order
counts corresponding to the
sums of higher-order counts, then the
.B \-trust-totals 
options may be given for efficiency.
The
.B \-text 
option specifies a test set to which the LM is to be applied, and 
builds the LM in such a way that only N-gram context occurring in the
test data are included in the model, this saving space at the expense of
generality.
All other
.I options
are passed to 
.B ngram-count 
(only options affecting model estimation should be given).
Smoothing methods other than Good-Turing, modified Kneser-Ney and Witten-Bell are not
supported by
.BR make-big-lm .
Kneser-Ney smoothing also requires enough disk space to compute and store the
modified lower-order counts used by the KN method.
This is done using the 
.B merge-batch-counts
command, and the
.B \-max-per-file
option controls how many counts are to be stored per batch, and 
should be chosen so that these batches fit in real memory.
The 
.B \-ngram-filter 
option allows specification of a command through which the input N-gram
counts are piped, e.g., to convert from some non-standard format.
.PP
.B make-kn-counts
computes the modified lower-order counts used by the KN smoothing method.
It is invoked as a helper scripts by 
.B make-big-lm .
.PP
.B replace-unk-words
replaces words not appearing in the 
.I vocab
file with the unknown word tag
.BR <unk> .
This is useful for preparing text data for LM training.
Only the first token on each line in the 
.I vocab
file is significant, so both word lists and unigram count files may be used.
.PP
.B replace-words-with-classes
replaces expansions of word classes with the corresponding class labels.
.I classes
specifies class expansions in 
.BR classes-format (5).
Substitutions are performed at each word position in left to right order,
with the longest matching right-hand-side of any class expansion.
If several classes match a pseudo-random choice is made.
Optionally, the file
.I counts
will receive the expansion counts resulting from the replacements.
.B normalize=0
or
.B 1
indicates whether the counts should be normalized to probabilities
(default is 1).
The
.B addone 
option may be used to smooth the expansion probabilities by adding 
.I K 
to each count (default 1).
The option 
.B have_counts=1
indicates that the input consists of N-gram counts and that replacement
should be performed on them.
Note this will not merge counts that have been mapped to identical N-grams,
since this is done automatically when 
.BR ngram-count (1)
reads count data.
The option
.B partial=1
prevents multi-word class expansions from being replaced when more than
one space character occurs inbetween the words.
.PP
.B uniform-classes
takes a file in
.BR classes-format (5)
and adds uniform probabilities to expansions that don't have a probability
explicitly stated.
.PP
.B make-diacritic-map
constructs a map file that pairs an ASCII-fied version of the words in
.I vocab
with all the occurring non-ASCII word forms.
Such a map file can then be used with
.BR disambig (1)
and a language model
to reconstruct the non-ASCII word form with diacritics from an ASCII
text.
.PP
.B vp2text
is a reimplementation of the filter used in the DARPA Hub-3 and Hub-4 
CSR evaluations to convert ``verbalized punctuation'' texts to
language model training data.
.PP
.B compute-oov-rate
determines the out-of-vocabulary rate of a corpus from its unigram
.I counts
and a target vocabulary list in
.IR vocab .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ngram-count(1), ngram(1), classes-format(5), disambig(1), select-vocab(1).
.SH BUGS
Some of the tools could be generalized and/or made more robust to
misuse.
.br
Several of these tools are gawk scripts and depending on prevailing locale
settings might require an LC_NUMERIC=C environment variable.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <anstolck@microsoft.com>
.br
Copyright 1995-2008 SRI International
.br
Copyright 2013 Microsoft Corp.
