.\" $Id: ngram-discount.7,v 1.4 2008/01/02 06:26:15 stolcke Exp $
.TH ngram-discount 7 "$Date: 2008/01/02 06:26:15 $" "SRILM Miscellaneous"
.SH NAME
ngram-discount \- notes on the N-gram smoothing implementations in SRILM
.SH NOTATION
.TP 10
.IR a _ z
An N-gram where
.I a
is the first word,
.I z
is the last word, and "_" represents 0 or more words in between.
.TP
.IR p ( a _ z )
The estimated conditional probability of the \fIn\fPth word
.I z
given the first \fIn\fP-1 words
.RI ( a _)
of an N-gram.
.TP
.IR a _ 
The \fIn\fP-1 word prefix of the N-gram
.IR a _ z .
.TP
.RI _ z
The \fIn\fP-1 word suffix of the N-gram
.IR a _ z .
.TP
.IR c ( a _ z )
The count of N-gram
.IR a _ z
in the training data.
.TP
.IR n (*_ z )
The number of unique N-grams that match a given pattern.
``(*)'' represents a wildcard matching a single word.
.TP
.IR n1 , n [1]
The number of unique N-grams with count = 1.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
N-gram models try to estimate the probability of a word
.I z
in the context of the previous \fIn\fP-1 words
.RI ( a _),
i.e.,
.IR Pr ( z | a _).
We will
denote this conditional probability using
.IR p ( a _ z )
for convenience.
One way to estimate
.IR p ( a _ z )
is to look at the number of times word
.I z
has followed the previous \fIn\fP-1 words
.RI ( a _):
.nf

(1)	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)/\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)

.fi
This is known as the maximum likelihood (ML) estimate.
Unfortunately it does not work very well because it assigns zero probability to
N-grams that have not been observed in the training data.
To avoid the zero probabilities, we take some probability mass from the observed
N-grams and distribute it to unobserved N-grams.
Such redistribution is known as smoothing or discounting.
.PP
Most existing smoothing algorithms can be described by the following equation:
.nf

(2)	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)

.fi
If the N-gram
.IR a _ z
has been observed in the training data, we use the
distribution
.IR f ( a _ z ).
Typically
.IR f ( a _ z )
is discounted to be less than
the ML estimate so we have some leftover probability for the
.I z
words unseen in the context
.RI ( a _).
Different algorithms mainly differ on how
they discount the ML estimate to get
.IR f ( a _ z ).
.PP
If the N-gram
.IR a _ z
has not been observed in the training data, we use
the lower order distribution
.IR p (_ z ).
If the context has never been
observed (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) = 0),
we can use the lower order distribution directly (bow(\fIa\fP_) = 1).
Otherwise we need to compute a backoff weight (bow) to
make sure probabilities are normalized:
.fi

	Sum_\fIz\fP \fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 1

.fi
.PP
Let
.I Z
be the set of all words in the vocabulary,
.I Z0
be the set of all words with \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 0, and
.I Z1
be the set of all words with \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0.
Given
.IR f ( a _ z ),
.RI bow( a _)
can be determined as follows:
.nf

(3)	Sum_\fIZ\fP  \fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 1
	Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + Sum_\fIZ0\fP bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP) = 1
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / Sum_\fIZ0\fP \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)
	        = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP))
	        = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP))

.fi
.PP
Smoothing is generally done in one of two ways.
The backoff models compute
.IR p ( a _ z )
based on the N-gram counts
.IR c ( a _ z )
when \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0, and
only consider lower order counts
.IR c (_ z )
when \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 0.
Interpolated models take lower order counts into account when
\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0 as well.
A common way to express an interpolated model is:
.nf

(4)	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)

.fi
Where \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 0 when \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = 0
and it is discounted to be less than
the ML estimate when \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0
to reserve some probability mass for
the unseen
.I z
words.
Given
.IR g ( a _ z ),
.RI bow( a _)
can be determined as follows:
.nf

(5)	Sum_\fIZ\fP  \fIp(\fP\fIa_\fP\fIz)\fP = 1
	Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIg(\fP\fIa_\fP\fIz\fP) + Sum_\fIZ\fP bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP) = 1
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = 1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)

.fi
.PP
An interpolated model can also be expressed in the form of equation
(2), which is the way it is represented in the ARPA format model files
in SRILM:
.nf

(6)	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)
	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)

.fi
.PP
Most algorithms in SRILM have both backoff and interpolated versions.
Empirically, interpolated algorithms usually do better than the backoff
ones, and Kneser-Ney does better than others.

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
This section describes the formulation of each discounting option in
.BR ngram-count (1).
After giving the motivation for each discounting method,
we will give expressions for
.IR f ( a _ z )
and
.RI bow( a _)
of Equation 2 in terms of the counts.
Note that some counts may not be included in the model
file because of the
.B \-gtmin
options; see Warning 4 in the next section.
.PP
Backoff versions are the default but interpolated versions of most
models are available using the
.B \-interpolate
option.
In this case we will express
.IR g ( a _z )
and
.RI bow( a _)
of Equation 4 in terms of the counts as well.
Note that the ARPA format model files store the interpolated
models and the backoff models the same way using
.IR f ( a _ z )
and
.RI bow( a _);
see Warning 3 in the next section.
The conversion between backoff and
interpolated formulations is given in Equation 6.
.PP
The discounting options may be followed by a digit (1-9) to indicate
that only specific N-gram orders be affected.
See
.BR ngram-count (1)
for more details.
.TP
.BI \-cdiscount " D"
Ney's absolute discounting using
.I D
as the constant to subtract.
.I D
should be between 0 and 1.
If
.I Z1
is the set
of all words
.I z
with \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0:
.nf

	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) - \fID\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)
	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)    ; Eqn.2
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP f(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP)) ; Eqn.3

.fi
With the
.B \-interpolate
option we have:
.nf

	\fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = max(0, \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) - \fID\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)
	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)	; Eqn.4
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = 1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)		; Eqn.5
	        = \fID\fP \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)

.fi
The suggested discount factor is:
.nf

	\fID\fP = \fIn1\fP / (\fIn1\fP + 2*\fIn2\fP)

.fi
where
.I n1
and
.I n2
are the total number of N-grams with exactly one and
two counts, respectively.
Different discounting constants can be
specified for different N-gram orders using options
.BR \-cdiscount1 ,
.BR \-cdiscount2 ,
etc.
.TP
.BR \-kndiscount " and " \-ukndiscount
Kneser-Ney discounting.
This is similar to absolute discounting in
that the discounted probability is computed by subtracting a constant
.I D
from the N-gram count.
The options
.B \-kndiscount
and
.B \-ukndiscount
differ as to how this constant is computed.
.br
The main idea of Kneser-Ney is to use a modified probability estimate
for lower order N-grams used for backoff.
Specifically, the modified
probability for a lower order N-gram is taken to be proportional to the
number of unique words that precede it in the training data.
With discounting and normalization we get:
.nf

	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) - \fID0\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) 	;; for highest order N-grams
	\fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIn\fP(*_\fIz\fP) - \fID1\fP) / \fIn\fP(*_*)	;; for lower order N-grams

.fi
where the
.IR n (*_ z )
notation represents the number of unique N-grams that
match a given pattern with (*) used as a wildcard for a single word.
.I D0
and
.I D1
represent two different discounting constants, as each N-gram
order uses a different discounting constant.
The resulting
conditional probability and the backoff weight is calculated as given
in equations (2) and (3):
.nf

	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)     ; Eqn.2
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP f(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP))  ; Eqn.3

.fi
The option
.B \-interpolate
is used to create the interpolated versions of
.B \-kndiscount
and
.BR \-ukndiscount .
In this case we have:
.nf

	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)  ; Eqn.4

.fi
Let
.I Z1
be the set {\fIz\fP: \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0}.
For highest order N-grams we have:
.nf

	\fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = max(0, \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) - \fID\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = 1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)
	        = 1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) + Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fID\fP / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)
	        = \fID\fP \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)

.fi
Let
.I Z2
be the set {\fIz\fP: \fIn\fP(*_\fIz\fP) > 0}.
For lower order N-grams we have:
.nf

	\fIg\fP(_\fIz\fP)  = max(0, \fIn\fP(*_\fIz\fP) - \fID\fP) / \fIn\fP(*_*)
	bow(_) = 1 - Sum_\fIZ2\fP \fIg\fP(_\fIz\fP)
	       = 1 - Sum_\fIZ2\fP \fIn\fP(*_\fIz\fP) / \fIn\fP(*_*) + Sum_\fIZ2\fP \fID\fP / \fIn\fP(*_*)
	       = \fID\fP \fIn\fP(_*) / \fIn\fP(*_*)

.fi
The original Kneser-Ney discounting
.RB ( \-ukndiscount )
uses one discounting constant for each N-gram order.
These constants are estimated as
.nf

	\fID\fP = \fIn1\fP / (\fIn1\fP + 2*\fIn2\fP)

.fi
where
.I n1
and
.I n2
are the total number of N-grams with exactly one and
two counts, respectively.
.br
Chen and Goodman's modified Kneser-Ney discounting
.RB ( \-kndiscount )
uses three discounting constants for each N-gram order, one for one-count
N-grams, one for two-count N-grams, and one for three-plus-count N-grams:
.nf

	\fIY\fP   = \fIn1\fP/(\fIn1\fP+2*\fIn2\fP)
	\fID1\fP  = 1 - 2\fIY\fP(\fIn2\fP/\fIn1\fP)
	\fID2\fP  = 2 - 3\fIY\fP(\fIn3\fP/\fIn2\fP)
	\fID3+\fP = 3 - 4\fIY\fP(\fIn4\fP/\fIn3\fP)

.fi
.TP
.B Warning:
SRILM implements Kneser-Ney discounting by actually modifying the
counts of the lower order N-grams.  Thus, when the
.B \-write
option is
used to write the counts with
.B \-kndiscount
or
.BR \-ukndiscount ,
only the highest order N-grams and N-grams that start with <s> will have their
regular counts
.IR c ( a _ z ),
all others will have the modified counts
.IR n (*_ z )
instead.
See Warning 2 in the next section.
.TP
.B \-wbdiscount
Witten-Bell discounting.
The intuition is that the weight given
to the lower order model should be proportional to the probability of
observing an unseen word in the current context
.RI ( a _).
Witten-Bell computes this weight as:
.nf

	bow(\fIa\fP_) = \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) / (\fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) + \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_))

.fi
Here
.IR n ( a _*)
represents the number of unique words following the
context
.RI ( a _)
in the training data.
Witten-Bell is originally an interpolated discounting method.
So with the
.B \-interpolate
option we get:
.nf

	\fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) / (\fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) + \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_))
	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = \fIg\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)    ; Eqn.4

.fi
Without the
.B \-interpolate
option we have the backoff version which is
implemented by taking
.IR f ( a _ z )
to be the same as the interpolated
.IR g ( a _ z ).
.nf

	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) / (\fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) + \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_))
	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)    ; Eqn.2
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP)) ; Eqn.3

.fi
.TP
.B \-ndiscount
Ristad's natural discounting law.
See Ristad's technical report "A natural law of succession"
for a justification of the discounting factor.
The
.B \-interpolate
option has no effect, only a backoff version has been implemented.
.nf

	          \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) + 1) + \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*) (1 - \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*))
	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = ------  ---------------------------------------
	          \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)        \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)^2 + \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) + 2 \fIn\fP(\fIa\fP_*)

	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)    ; Eqn.2
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP f(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP)) ; Eqn.3

.fi
.TP
.B \-count-lm
Estimate a count-based interpolated LM using Jelinek-Mercer smoothing
(Chen & Goodman, 1998), also known as "deleted interpolation."
Note that this does not produce a backoff model; instead of 
count-LM parameter file in the format described in 
.BR ngram (1)
needs to be specified using
.BR \-init-lm ,
and a reestimated file in the same format is produced.
In the process, the mixture weights that interpolate the ML estimates
at all levels of N-grams are estimated using an expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm.
The options
.B \-em-iters
and
.B \-em-delta
control termination of the EM algorithm.
Note that the N-gram counts used to estimate the maximum-likelihood
estimates are specified in the 
.B \-init-lm
model file.
The counts specified with
.B \-read
or
.B \-text
are used only to estimate the interpolation weights.
\" ???What does this all mean in terms of the math???
.TP
.BI \-addsmooth " D"
Smooth by adding 
.I D
to each N-gram count.
This is usually a poor smoothing method,
included mainly for instructional purposes.
.nf

	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + \fID\fP) / (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_) + \fID\fP \fIn\fP(*))

.fi
.TP
default
If the user does not specify any discounting options,
.B ngram-count
uses Good-Turing discounting (aka Katz smoothing) by default.
The Good-Turing estimate states that for any N-gram that occurs
.I r
times, we should pretend that it occurs
.IR r '
times where
.nf

	\fIr\fP' = (\fIr\fP+1) \fIn\fP[\fIr\fP+1]/\fIn\fP[\fIr\fP]

.fi
Here
.IR n [ r ]
is the number of N-grams that occur exactly
.I r
times in the training data.  
.br
Large counts are taken to be reliable, thus they are not subject to
any discounting.
By default unigram counts larger than 1 and other N-gram counts larger
than 7 are taken to be reliable and maximum
likelihood estimates are used.
These limits can be modified using the
.BI \-gt n max
options.
.nf

	\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_))  if \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > \fIgtmax\fP

.fi
The lower counts are discounted proportional to the Good-Turing
estimate with a small correction
.I A
to account for the high-count N-grams not being discounted.
If 1 <= \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) <= \fIgtmax\fP:
.nf

                   \fIn\fP[\fIgtmax\fP + 1]
  \fIA\fP = (\fIgtmax\fP + 1) --------------
                      \fIn\fP[1]

                          \fIn\fP[\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + 1]
  \fIc\fP'(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) + 1) ---------------
                            \fIn\fP[\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)]

            \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)   (\fIc\fP'(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) / \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) - \fIA\fP)
  \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) = --------  ----------------------
             \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_)         (1 - \fIA\fP)

.fi
The
.B \-interpolate
option has no effect in this case, only a backoff
version has been implemented, thus:
.nf

	\fIp\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)  = (\fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) > 0) ? \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP) : bow(\fIa\fP_) \fIp\fP(_\fIz\fP)    ; Eqn.2
	bow(\fIa\fP_) = (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) / (1 - Sum_\fIZ1\fP \fIf\fP(_\fIz\fP)) ; Eqn.3

.fi
.SH "FILE FORMATS"
SRILM can generate simple N-gram counts from plain text files with the
following command:
.nf
	ngram-count -order \fIN\fP -text \fIfile.txt\fP -write \fIfile.cnt\fP
.fi
The
.B \-order
option determines the maximum length of the N-grams.
The file
.I file.txt
should contain one sentence per line with tokens
separated by whitespace.
The output
.I file.cnt
contains the N-gram
tokens followed by a tab and a count on each line:
.nf

	\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP <tab> \fIc\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)

.fi
A couple of warnings:
.TP
.B "Warning 1"
SRILM implicitly assumes an <s> token in the beginning of each line
and an </s> token at the end of each line and counts N-grams that start
with <s> and end with </s>.
You do not need to include these tags in
.IR file.txt .
.TP
.B "Warning 2"
When
.B \-kndiscount
or
.B \-ukndiscount
options are used, the count file contains modified counts.
Specifically, all N-grams of the maximum
order, and all N-grams that start with <s> have their regular counts
.IR c ( a _ z ),
but shorter N-grams that do not start with <s> have the number
of unique words preceding them
.IR n (* a _ z )
instead.
See the description of
.B \-kndiscount
and
.B \-ukndiscount
for details.
.PP
For most smoothing methods (except
.BR \-count-lm )
SRILM generates and uses N-gram model files in the ARPA format.
A typical command to generate a model file would be:
.nf
	ngram-count -order \fIN\fP -text \fIfile.txt\fP -lm \fIfile.lm\fP
.fi
The ARPA format output
.I file.lm
will contain the following information about an N-gram on each line:
.nf

	log10(\fIf\fP(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP)) <tab> \fIa\fP_\fIz\fP <tab> log10(bow(\fIa\fP_\fIz\fP))

.fi
Based on Equation 2, the first entry represents the base 10 logarithm
of the conditional probability (logprob) for the N-gram
.IR a _ z .
This is followed by the actual words in the N-gram separated by spaces.
The last and optional entry is the base-10 logarithm of the backoff weight
for (\fIn\fP+1)-grams starting with
.IR a _ z .
.TP
.B "Warning 3"
Both backoff and interpolated models are represented in the same
format.
This means interpolation is done during model building and
represented in the ARPA format with logprob and backoff weight using
equation (6).
.TP
.B "Warning 4"
Not all N-grams in the count file necessarily end up in the model file.
The options
.BR \-gtmin ,
.BR \-gt1min ,
\&...,
.B \-gt9min
specify the minimum counts
for N-grams to be included in the LM (not only for Good-Turing
discounting but for the other methods as well).
By default all unigrams and bigrams
are included, but for higher order N-grams only those with count >= 2 are
included.
Some exceptions arise, because if one N-gram is included in
the model file, all its prefix N-grams have to be included as well.
This causes some higher order 1-count N-grams to be included when using
KN discounting, which uses modified counts as described in Warning 2.
.TP
.B "Warning 5"
Not all N-grams in the model file have backoff weights.
The highest order N-grams do not need a backoff weight.
For lower order N-grams
backoff weights are only recorded for those that appear as the prefix
of a longer N-gram included in the model.
For other lower order N-grams
the backoff weight is implicitly 1 (or 0, in log representation).

.SH "SEE ALSO"
ngram(1), ngram-count(1), ngram-format(5),
.br
S. F. Chen and J. Goodman, ``An Empirical Study of Smoothing Techniques for
Language Modeling,'' TR-10-98, Computer Science Group, Harvard Univ., 1998.
.SH BUGS
Work in progress.
.SH AUTHOR
Deniz Yuret <dyuret@ku.edu.tr>
.br
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>
.br
Copyright 2007 SRI International
